one in five children will not leave
childhood without developing a serious
mental illness anxiety depression ADHD
behavioral problems and what pisses me
off it's that we're not really educating
or telling parents the truth as to why
why is it that what you say is so
troubling for some people sometimes
facts are An Inconvenient Truth but
everything I'm going to say is supported
by research Erica Kamar is a parenting
expert and psychoanalyst who uses over
30 years of research to challenge the
societal norms on parenting and Early
Child Development there's some myths
that really have to be debunked about
how to raise a healthy child and the
first is dayc care is good for children
for socialization no it is so bad for
their brain and it's been known to
increase aggression behavioral problems
attachment disorders because babies need
their mothers SP the first three years
for emotional security can a father do
that so fathers are important in a
different way and I'll go through all of
that but they're both critical because
if you're raised without one you are
missing a piece and then there's quality
versus quantity time myth you need to be
there a quality of time as well as a
quantity of time you can't have a
fabulous career and then come home and
be present for your child on your time
it needs to be on their time and there's
more and we're going to go through all
of them but are there any areas of
privilege that you need to acknowledge
maybe someone who doesn't have a partner
there or someone who is in an extremely
difficult economic situation they do but
there are ways to creatively deal with
it and I'll go through each of them so
there's
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much
Erica you're clearly on a
mission and I get that energy from you
that there's really an idea that you
believe that much of the world doesn't
believe or is struggling to accept in
some way but it's an important
idea what is the mission that you're
on I like to think of it as three PS
presence prioritization and prevention
and I'll go through each of them
um my mission is to educate parents and
uh policy makers and clinicians and
Educators about the the fact that for
children to be mentally healthy in the
future you have to be physically and
emotionally present for them throughout
childhood but particularly in the two
critical periods of brain development
which are 0 to3 and 9 to 25 which is
adolescence so in those two critical
periods of brain
development uh particularly 0 to3 um
much of a child's development depends on
their environment and you are their
environment so I run around the world
talking about the importance of physical
and emotional presence attachment
security attachment security is the
foundation for future mental health
prioritization we prioritize everything
today other than our children we
prioritize our work our careers uh our
material success our personal desires
and Pleasures but what we're not
prioritizing is children um and you know
that's a problem because if we don't
prioritize them they break down they may
break down at three they may break down
at 8 or they may not break down till
they're in adolescence but eventually
they break down and prevention there's
so much that we can do we have a mental
health crisis now in the world it varies
to a certain degree in America one in
five children will not leave childhood
without breaking down at some point
without developing a serious mental
illness anxiety depression ADHD
behavioral problems um Suicidal Thoughts
so uh we have a problem in the UK it's 1
in six in America it's one in five it's
around the world it's about one in five
that is a shocking figure and so and and
the truth is we can do a great deal to
prevent that the idea that we are trying
to put out fires without talking about
what is the origin of these issues the
way that the mental health care system
works now it's like what I call cutting
the grass uh children are medicated
which is basically just pain management
um they're given CBT therapy which again
is just pain management but why aren't
we asking the important questions which
is where does emotional regulation
originate where does it come from from
when does it start how do we Foster
development in children from a very
young age to promote resilience to
stress and adversity in the future and
so those are my three
missions and for someone who doesn't
know your work and doesn't isn't aware
of
you they might be thinking how would you
know Erica how would you know the answer
so I'm a
psychoanalyst um I'm also a social
worker I started out as a social worker
and then became a psychoanalyst I'm also
an author of books on parent guidance
and parents
education um and I've been in practice
seeing patience so the majority of my
work is still seeing patience I have a
fulltime job of seeing patience and uh
as someone who is also a parent I have
three children of my own um and so as a
parent as a clinician uh as an author
who has for the past 20 years been
researching and what I did is I
collected research in
epigenetics and attachment Theory and
Neuroscience and uh wrote my first book
being there because what what happened
is I was seeing this uptick and mental
illness in children and this is really
how I got into it um about 30 years ago
I started practicing about 36 years ago
but I was probably 5 years into my
practice and I was seeing that the
families that were coming to see me had
younger and younger children that were
being diagnosed with very serious mental
illnesses and being medicated at a very
young age basically silencing their pain
and what I was observing in my practice
is that those children who were doing
the least well were the ones whose
mothers were the least present in their
lives so their primary attachment
Figures were the least present in their
lives and so then I started looking at
the research I looked at all the
Neuroscience research since the 90s and
all of the new new research that had
come out um I looked at the old
attachment theories which have been
around since the 60s and I looked at the
epigenetic research which was rather new
too and I saw this trend I I saw that we
were abandoning our children for our own
desires for our careers for material
success um and there was a great deal of
misunderstanding about the irreducible
emotional needs of children we're going
to go through all of that today I'm very
excited to learn more about all of this
I'm not a parent myself um from all the
investigative research we've done you
have three very well adjusted children
um so congratulations for that and I
hope to have successful children myself
one day but I'm also just really
interested in understanding myself
through the work that you've done and
the work that you continue to do because
we're all at one point children and much
of the Fingerprints of that early
experience still exists in us today so
I'm ke to understand how things that
might have happened to me or anyone
listening today when we were younger may
have shaped Us in pro-social antisocial
ways or productive or unproductive ways
you mentioned that you still see clients
and patients
today what kind of patients do you see
what are they struggling with and who
are they are you seeing the parents the
kids
both well I have a very large parent
guidance practice because of the books
that I write um and the articles I write
I also write for the Wall Street Journal
and other newspapers so I you know
people find me through my writing um and
then they reach out for help um and and
so I have the parent guidance basically
means people come to see me either both
parents or one parent because they have
questions about their child's
development or something's going wrong
their child's starting to to develop
symptoms um and they don't want to
medicate them and they want to
understand what's really at the root
cause of of of of the issue and so
that's a a good portion of my practice
but I also see individual patients for
depression and anxiety and I see couples
and you know the joke about
psychoanalysts is we're all specialists
in depression and
anxiety but um yeah so I see individuals
and couples but a lot of parent guidance
work and they come to you typically
because there's they're noticing
something is not right with their child
sometimes they'll come preventatively
because they want to raise a healthy
child and there's so much white noise in
society there's so much of
misinformation our instincts are to lean
into our children our evolutionary Drive
is to create a feeling of Safety and
Security for our children and to be as
present as possible and to sooe them
when they're in distress and to be there
to teach them our values and but Society
um took a turn it took a turn in the you
could say going back to the Industrial
Revolution if I really want to go back
I'll say the Industrial Revolution was a
time when women were forced into the
workplace into factories and cities you
know they were separated from children
for the first time but really the turn
that Society took that that I think has
a lot to do with what's happening today
is the me movement of the 60s and also
the feminist movement both of those
movements which had a tremendously
positive impact on society in one way
also had had a tremendously negative
impact on society um when women decided
that it was cool to go to work and to
work full-time out of the home you know
everybody cheered and said great you
know women have the same rights as men
and now everybody can be in the
workforce and be independent and make
money and do their own thing me me me me
me the problem is that children were
dropped they were abandoned and their
needs which are not needs that are going
to shift because Society shifts because
they have
irreducible uh neurological emotional
needs so we know that babies are born
neurologically and emotionally
fragile and so what that means is
they're not born resilient and today
what's being projected onto babies is
they can handle a lot they can handle
stress they can handle
separation um they can handle you going
back to work after six weeks or three
months and leaving them in daycare with
strangers or you know and from an
evolutionary
perspective babies have always needed
the physical skin-to-skin contact with
their mothers for the first year and
most parts of the world babies are worn
on their mother's bodies because mothers
perform a number of really important
functions for babies that are biological
functions based on our evolutionary need
to provide our babies with what we call
attachment security um so you know
Society took a turn and it's it's um
it's caused a lot of damage I mean this
Mental Health crisis in children I saw
coming 30 years ago and it was already
you know so um you know I have uh
friends and colleagues like Jonathan Hy
who says oh well it didn't start till
social media and that's false because I
was seeing this uptick and if you really
look there was an uptick in mental
illness and children um going back
decades and it had everything to do with
the shift in society towards
self-centeredness towards narcissism
towards
individualism towards M me me and so you
know and I we say that you don't have to
have children period to have a
satisfying life but if you're going to
have children you need to be equipped to
care for them because having children
alone without really understanding what
it means to care for them and being
prepared to take on that
responsibility is causing our children
to break down why do you mention mothers
and not fathers in that because you you
seem to have an emphasis on the role
that a mother plays and it seems to be
more important in your view than the
role that a father plays or maybe even
that a nanny or some other caregiver
could play and I noticed that on your
first book which was written in
2017 being there on the cover it says
why prioritizing motherhood in big
letters in the first three years matters
scientifically evolutionarily with
studies and research how can you make
the case to me to make me believe that
the role of the mother in particular is
essential versus a father or other
caregiver so in fact in the book it
talks about the difference between
mothers and fathers because that's an
important question um and the reason I
wrote about mothers is not because
fathers are unimportant but fathers are
important in a different way so there's
a whole debate in society about this
kind of idea of gender neutrality that
mothers and fathers are interchangeable
but actually from an evolutionary
perspective as mammals they're not
interchangeable they serve different
functions and those roles and those
behaviors are connected to nurturing
hormones so mothers um are really
important for what we call sensitive
empathic nurturing when children are
infants and toddlers that means that
when children are in distress mothers
soothe babies and therefore regulate
their emotions from moment to moment
every time a mother soothes a baby uh
with skin-to-skin contact and eye
contact and the soothing tone of her
voice she's leaning into that baby's
pain and she is regulating that baby's
emotions and the way I like to think
about it is that you know when babies
are born they're
born
emotionally disjointed think about say
sailing in the Atlantic this is how
baby's emotions go they'll go from 0 to
60 in 3 seconds with their emotions um
and where we want to get babies is to
sailing in the Caribbean not flatlining
but we want them to be able to regulate
their emotions but they're not born that
way and so
mothers because they sooth the baby from
moment to moment when they're physically
and emotionally present enough in the
first three years they help a baby to
learn how to regulate their emotions so
by 3 years of age 85% of the right brain
is developed and by 3 years of age
babies can then start to internalize the
ability to regulate their own emotions
now if mothers aren't present as the
primary attachment figures to do that
mirroring of emotion to do that soothing
of of their emotions then babies don't
learn how to regulate their emotions the
other thing that's important that
mothers do is they buffer babies from
stress by wearing ing them on their body
for the first year and then by being as
present as possible for three years they
actually protect baby's brains from
cortisol the stress hormone so there is
a a hormone called oxytocin it's the
love hormone and it is protective
against cortisol the more a mother
nurtures with sensitive empathic
nurturing meaning when the baby cries
the mother goes oh sweetheart you know
let me see the boo boo let me kiss the
boo boo that that actually raises the
oxytocin in the baby's brain which then
protects the baby from cortisol can a
father do that so now fathers why are
fathers important so fathers also
produce oxytocin but it has a different
effect on their brain so for mothers
oxytocin makes mothers sensitive
empathic nurturers very Vigilant to the
baby's distress when fathers produce
oxytocin it comes from a different part
of their brain and makes them more what
we call playful tactile stimulators of
babies what does that sound like to you
playful tactful stimulators of babies
throwing the baby up in the air and
tickling the baby and running after the
baby and rough housing and so that's
important for a variety of reasons um
first it encourages things like
exploration and risk-taking it
encourages
separation and fathers do this really
important thing which is they help the
baby to learn to regulate certain
emotions so mothers help to regulate
sadness fear distress fathers help to
regulate excitement and aggression so
when fathers aren't in the house when
there are single mothers raising
children without a father often little
boys develop behavioral problems is what
we're seeing that they can't regulate
their aggression because fathers help
little boys in particular but little
girls too to regulate aggression so when
fathers are aren't around you'll often
see little boys who are more impulsive
who are more aggressive um so the answer
is fathers and mothers are both critical
to the development of children which is
a very controversial thing to say today
because if you're raised without one you
are missing a piece but they're not the
same and they're not the same because
our hormones dictate they're not the
same so fathers produce a hormone in
great quantities called vasopress
vasopressin is the protective aggressive
hormone and what does it do it helps
fathers to protect their family there
was a study that was done where mothers
and fathers lay in
bed and the baby cries was out of the UK
this study the baby cries and the father
sleep through the baby's distress cries
but the mothers wake up right away okay
but with the rustling of leaves outside
the window the mother sleep through it
and the fathers wake up right away
because the fathers are attuned to
predatorial threat so our nurturing
hormones make us different I mean the
fact that we can say that there are many
things that are similar between women
and men of course we're both intelligent
we can both be
ambitious um but I think the idea that
we want to kind of make everything the
same when it's just not factual it is
the the Inconvenient Truth that mothers
and fathers nurturing hormones dictate
that if they are healthy and they've
been raised in a healthy environment
they are different now does that mean
that a father can't raise a child and be
a sensitive empathic nurture it it
doesn't mean he can't take on that role
but if as a society we can't acknowledge
the differences then a father can't
learn to be a sensitive empathic
nurturer meaning these are instinctual
behaviors and so that infant if that
father is going to stay home with that
baby acknowledging the differences
allows that father then to become a
sensitive empathic
nurturer so interesting because these
aren't the ideas that are socially
accepted or at least the ideas you see
on social media and funly enough as you
were speaking I recorded everything you
said and I ran it through Ai and AI said
the core ideas that you shared um are
well supported by evolutionary
Psychology and Neuroscience which is
quite surprising because usually
AI argues with people I mean so so the
thing is none of the books I write are
based on opinion so I'm I'm very
skittish about saying anything that
isn't backed up with research um so it's
everything that I write about and speak
about is is supported by research why is
it that what you say is so troubling for
some people have you you know why right
because it because it makes us confront
a set of realities that it's an
inconvenience Tru toore it's An
Inconvenient Truth um sometimes facts
are An Inconvenient Truth just like you
know Climate Change Is An Inconvenient
Truth um this is An Inconvenient Truth
it inconveniences people it also makes
people feel guilty so I don't believe
that guilt is a bad feeling I don't
believe that guilt is a Bad Thing guilt
is a sign that your ego is functioning
it's a sign that the part of you the
part of your ego called the super ego
can identify something that feels right
and wrong so if you look at a baby who's
crying who's your baby and you feel
nothing that means that there's a part
of you that is dead inside there's a
part of you that is unempathic towards
your own young and we would say that
that doesn't make that person a bad
person it makes that person someone who
probably had some early trauma
themselves right it means that they
probably have some kind of attachment
disorder where they can't be attuned to
their their baby's pain right so when
you are guilty it means you have
internal conflict it means two parts of
you are struggling with each other the
part of you that wants to do whatever
you want to do I want to go out to work
I want to make money I want to be free
you know and the other part of you that
says wait a second but my baby my baby
needs me look at my vulnerable baby look
how sad look at the distress that my
absence is causing that baby so if we
don't feel guilt then our species is
lost we're lost now excessive guilt is
another thing if you're a good enough
mother or a good enough father and you
still feel guilty then we call it
anxiety but for the most part what I say
makes a lot of women and men feel guilty
and again I don't see that as a bad
thing and I think when we tell parents
to turn turn away from their guilt
instead of turning toward it when we
turn towards our internal conflicts we
tend to make better decisions for
ourselves for our children for our
families um but when we turn away from
those conflicts we tend not to make good
decisions and those tend to have
long-term
consequences what exactly are you
inconveniencing with your
truth what are the ideas that you're
that you have to sacrifice time and
money and
freedom that if you want to raise
healthy children it's going to require
discomfort and frustration and
sacrifice and what's interesting is that
what's also happened is because we're
raising our children in such a selfish
self-centered
environment um young people are more
fragile they are more emotionally
fragile more of them have attachment
disorders they can't bear frustration
they can't bear pain they can't bear
sleeplessness you know the idea that you
have to get a baby nurse because you
can't get up in the middle of the night
with your own baby and that's become the
norm in certain socioeconomic circles I
mean
so women and men always raise children
in in history in extended family circles
right um they weren't isolated and today
parents are very isolated
so you would have your mother staying
with you or you'd have your sister
staying with you or you'd live in a big
house and there'd be people to support
you um I started a nonprofit uh recently
because I found that so many mothers
it's called attachment Circle so many
mothers feel so
isolated that dealing with the pain and
the discomfort of mothering alone is too
much for them so there is that so we
live in a very strange Society where
people are separate from one another in
their own houses and apartments and they
don't depend on one another because
dependency is a bad word and but there
there is also this issue of how are we
producing such frag fragile youth that
even the discomfort and the frustration
of raising children is too much for them
there's a big economic component to this
as well right because if you're raising
children in isolation the probability
that you have disposable income or at
least enough money to be able to just
stay at home and raise the kids and
still maintain any standard of quality
standard of life is lower if you're not
doing it with a big extended family that
can support and and pay for some of
those
costs interestingly yes and no to your
question um people who have less
economic resources are in general eneral
less isolated but they are also isolated
today you have a lot of single mothers
raising children not in an apartment
with other family members who've had to
move to other cities or countries to
make a living um who are really
isolated you know again it I I think it
crosses socioeconomic lines um but with
wealthier people more affluent people um
they're opting for isolation many of
them they're buying big houses they're
living in the suburbs or or they're not
wanting to lean on anyone right so we
have what I call a family diaspora it's
really what it is um which is that
people will move away from their
families of origin when they have
children which is very bizarre and anti-
instinctual so the world's become a
global place and we can move wherever
ever we want but doesn't it make Common
Sense isn't it a reasonable appause that
you would want to move closer to your
extended family even if they a pain in
the neck unless they're abusive um
because it provides you with support it
provides you with extended family
support but that's not what's happening
people are choosing to live
geographically distant from their
families of origin and so it's making it
harder for families it's making it
harder for women it's making them feel
more isolated but what if they they want
to they've got their own career they've
got their own passions there are things
that they love doing and that means that
they have to be working in a major city
or they have to be traveling to pursue
those things you just said it what if
they have passions what if they have a
career the problem is children do best
in extended family situations so you
know you can have a fabulous career and
move far away from your family and when
you're young and single and I even call
it single when you're married but don't
have children you're still really single
um you know what I say to parents is
that your life won't be so fabulous if
you have children and you're not present
for them physically and emotionally
particularly in the early years because
what happens is they break down and the
expression goes that a parent is only as
happy as their least happy child and so
there is no fabulous life if your
children are breaking down and that's
what families are learning is that you
know all of that
freedom and all that fabulous me time
comes at a cost if you have children so
one would say then well I just won't
have children then and that would be
fine and so there are a lot of people
that are saying today I don't see the
value in being responsible for another
human being and what they're missing out
on is the deep and rewarding emotional
connection to your children It's A Love
Like No Other Love But if you've
had if you've had trauma as a child if
you've had parents who were narcissistic
or resented parenting or uh you know
were distracted or mentally ill you know
you may already have had that trauma
that that implies that later it's harder
to connect right so those attachment
disorders that I was referring to
earlier there's three kinds of
attachment disorders there's the
avoidant attachment Disorder so what
does that mean so a healthy attachment
looks like
this um when you return home your child
feels so securely attached to you
meaning you've gone out for an hour or
two for dinner with your spouse you come
home and your baby is happy to see you
and the reunion what we call the reunion
is a beautiful reunion the baby is
joyful and happy and you know that's
healthy attachment it means that you've
made your baby feel so safe and secure
because you are there primarily and have
prioritize them the majority of the time
as the primary attachment figure that
when you come home your baby welcomes it
but what we're seeing is more and more
children developing attachment disorders
because their parents are push ping the
limits of how much they can leave those
babies and putting them in things like
institutional care and leaving them for
long hours at a time and traveling for
their fabulous careers than their
fabulous lives at ages when babies
really can't tolerate that kind of
Separation when a parent comes when the
primary attachment figure usually the
mother comes home and the baby turns
away from you and turns toward the
babysitter or to just turns away that
baby has the beginning of what's called
an avoidant attachment disorder now
that's correlated later on with things
like depression and difficulty forming
attachments later
on the next kind of uh attachment
disorder is called an ambivalent
attachment disorder and the mother then
comes home and the baby clings to the
mother for dear life because the
internal voice in that baby is my
Mommy's going to leave me again so I
have to hold on to her now that baby is
fractious and can't be soothed and will
not let go of that mother you know
holding on for dear life what I call
like the rees's monkeys did to the wire
cages right and that's correlated later
on with anxiety in
youth the disorganized attachment
disorder is different than the other two
in that the other two have a strategy so
think of an attachment disorder as a
strategy a child who's left for two many
hours by their parent or whose parent is
physically present but emotionally
checked out that baby has to cope has to
have a strategy turning away from the
mother is a strategy and the internal
narrative is my mommy isn't present for
me can't isn't isn't here for me won't
won't be there for me I can't trust my
environment and that baby says and I'm
going to have to uh cope on my own what
we call learned
helplessness um the ambivalent
attachment disorder you know that baby
is the strategy is you know I'm going to
hold on because if I don't hold on she's
going to leave again disorganized
Detachment disorder is the hardest to
treat um because the baby has no
strategy so the baby Cycles through many
strategies the baby will go from
clinging to avoiding to being enraged
and even slapping or hitting the mother
and then cycling through again um and
that baby that develops a disorganized
attachment disorder those are more those
babies it's correlated later with
borderline personality disorder and
we're seeing a huge rise in borderline
personality disorders and those are the
kids who are cutting themselves who are
trying to commit
suicide um we have a a mental illness
crisis the likes of which we've never
seen in history and it has everything to
do with how we're raising our children
you seem pissed off under that calm
demeanor pissed off yes I suppose I am
I'm not pissed off at the people I'm
pissed off at a society that is lying
we're not really educating or telling
parents the truth so there's four
attachment disorders avoidant secure
ambivalent disorganized well one secure
isn't a disorder so there's secure and
then there's three attachment disorders
avoid in bivalent disorganized yes how
does that manifest when you're an adult
so how would I know because you know I
can relate to some of these and I'm
wondering how that would then manifest
in my relationships with my life as an
adult outside of the obvious mental
health you know situations so avoiding
an avoiding attachment disorder would be
someone who um can't form meaningful and
deep connections can't commit has
difficulty committing has difficulty
trusting in the intimacy and the the
depth of intimacy in a relationship and
ambivalent an attachment disorder would
would be someone who's highly highly
anxious um someone who clings to you uh
calls you maybe uh a woman you've dated
in the past who called you five times a
day to check on you was worried that
you'd be the little fish that swam away
um and suffocate they suffocate the
people they love because they're afraid
to let go um disorganized attachment
borderline personality disorders they
tend to be very emotionally volatile
um there's a lot of anger there and um
and there's a lot of self harm self
Haring Behavior there do they end up
attracting a certain attachment style so
if I'm an avoidant do I then end up
attracting avoidance or do I is there
any research on that on how we then date
I'm guessing secures go for secures yeah
secures well if you're healthy you're
attracted to reciprocally healthy
relationships and you trust your
environment so you trust in loving
relationship ships and um
avoidance sometimes are attracted to
avoidant people because there's no
conflict there so in other words someone
who can't commit with someone also who
can't commit um that can break down
those at some point so remember that
these are pathological defenses so you
know we use the word defense because it
means to protect one right and and
defenses help us until they no longer
help us and so we say attachment to
disorders are pathological defenses
meaning they don't usually last a
lifetime they break down at some point
and so you might be with another
avoiding attachment disordered person
but at some point one of you breaks down
and then realizes that you need the
other and then you know then you're with
in a relationship with someone who can't
give back so yeah as we say like levels
of water meat so people will be
attracted to another often of the same
ilk but but it isn't necessarily a
healthy
relationship and of all these four
attachment Styles who do you think which
attachment style from in your opinion
and from your observations and the
people that you've seen is most likely
to have a successful and then also
unsuccessful relationship oh well secure
attachment will have a successful I mean
secure people with secure attachment uh
will be drawn to healthy reciprocal
loving
um deep connections because they've had
a deep and loving connection with their
mother so remember I said that you it's
only after 3 years of age that you
internalize a feeling of
security and where you internalize a
feeling that the world is a safe place
and you can trust the people in it and
you can trust to love another person and
so you know we we throw that word trust
around we don't realize that it comes
from the very beginnings of our de
development when we don't trust others
it's generally because we couldn't trust
those that we were to depend upon when
we were at our most vulnerable stage and
what about the the alternative so if
which of these attachment Styles is
least likely to have successful
relationships that's disorganized yeah
they have a very hard time forming
relationships holding on to
relationships um yeah I would say it's
it's they're the most
complicated to treat and they're also
the most complicated in terms of you
know being able to have successful
relationships in the future I was
wondering as you were speaking whether
if I have more kids so if I have 10
young kids yeah is there a higher
probability that of neglect in those
kids because I just if if I'm a mother I
just don't have time for all of these
kids at the same time they can't all be
on my chest at the same time yeah it's
it's a good question well there's
something in the developing world called
maternal dep syndrome which is that
mothers can actually die in the
developing world of having too many
children in Too Short a period of time
uh they get depleted physically but they
also get depleted emotionally I'm going
to say it right now so everybody can
hear it who's watching this having
children is stressful it is
frustrating it does require that you are
Sleepless for the first five years it
requires that you can tolerate a lot of
discomfort and
frustration so if there was a job
description first it would say the most
joyful uh
enriching thing you can do in your
entire life but what comes with that to
Foster healthy development is
frustration lack of sleep
stress uh discomfort and so that should
be part of the job
description yeah it seems to be such an
important principle for Life generally
that everything has an A tradeoff and I
think was it Einstein that said for
every Force has like an equal and
opposite counter force or something to
to that effect and a lot of people are
choosing not to make the decision to
have kids I was looking at some stats
around this the European Union witnessed
only 3.8 million births in 2022 nearly
half the number recorded six decades ago
marking one of the lowest birth rates in
history France for example known for its
robust family policies has seen a
decrease from 830,000 children
born in 2010 to just
670,000
2023 the lowest since World War II and
this is a huge Global Trend across
especially countries that have a lot of
money it is so I speak at a big
conference called The Alliance for
responsible citizenship and they talk
about a lot of these alarming dropping
birth rates the truth is though that uh
as countries become more developed birth
rates do decline to a certain degree ree
that has to do with economics some of it
but there's a trend that's happening
that's worse than this which is people
it's not that they're having less
children which actually you know
everybody has their own limits in terms
of their capacity to give and to love
and so for some people maybe one child
is enough for other people five children
isn't enough meaning they have so much
inside of them to give right um but the
alarming thing for me isn't the dropping
birth rates due to economics you know so
maybe people aren't having 10 children
like they used to they're having three
children or two children right the
alarming thing for me is that people are
not having
children that's more alarming to me
because that's more a sign not of a
country
developing but of a country and a
society of a modern society which does
not see the value in in raising children
and having deep and loving relationships
be a priority in your life those people
would say I have deep and loving
relationships with my partner with my
dog with my Uncle Auntie friends Etc
it's different and why is it different
it's a good question it's different
because um in the end your relationship
with your partner or with your auntie or
with your dog isn't the same level of
dependency the ability to care for
another human
being uh to allow another human being to
be dependent on you to devote to that
human being is a growing transforming
experience for human beings one would
say
that not sure I completely buy this
fully because but Jordan Peterson I
think has said I think it was Jordan who
said that you can't fully become an
adult if you don't have a child now I'm
not sure I would go that far because
there's some people who can't have
children but I do think that there is
something in terms of developmentally on
an adult development level that
transforms you that is meant to to
transform you in being generative and
having children again it's not for
everyone and I do say this that um I'm
not part of the pr nality movement where
I say everybody should have children I
don't think everybody should have
children but I do think that if you're
going to have
children then you need to look deeply at
your own upbringing and your own losses
and your own early traumas before you
bring them into this world so you can
repair whatever it is you need to repair
and not uh create what we call
generational expression of things like
attachment disorders and mental illness
and cuz a lot of people are struggling
now have kids even those that want to
yeah um looking at some stats and
there's a global prevalence of
infertility approximately 18% of adults
worldwide about one in six experience
infertility at some point in their lives
yeah between 2015 and 2019 about roughly
15% of us women aged 15 to 49
experienced impaired fertility and in
the UK Research indicates that one in
eight women listening to this now and
one in 10 men aged 16 to 74 have
experienced infertility which is defined
as unsuccessfully attempting pregnancy
for a year or
longer and I've spoken to a lot of
people actually that have tried to have
kids yeah for years very sad it's very
sad when people want children and they
can't have children it is incredibly sad
when you think about what's contributing
to that what how do you diagnose that
infertility challenge there are a lot of
theories some are environmental some are
the fact that we're delaying having
children we're lying to women and to men
we're telling them freeze your eggs in
fact this is a little disturbing I'll
tell you about this that law firms now
are um paying for the freezing of their
young female Associates
eggs I find that disturbing um saying
freeze your eggs work really hard for us
yeah you can have children later and the
truth is a lot of them can't because
when you freeze eggs it's not a
guarantee of fertility it's not a
guarantee that those eggs will turn into
embryos it's not a guarantee that those
embryos will turn into babies so there's
the age piece um there is also and
there's the environmental piece there is
also the stress piece which we are not
talking about um there's a component to
getting pregnant that is about stress we
have more stress on both men and women
you know it used to be that men died
sooner because they had more stress but
now I think it's evened out the odds I
think women make die sooner because they
have the stress of working and raising
children for the most part um but the
point is that that uh the stress that
young adults face because they're trying
to you know we should talk about some of
the other myths what's another myth
we'll weave it through this talk another
myth is you can do everything all at the
same time and do it well myth that's a
big myth you can't you can't have a
fabulous career working full-time and
traveling and being fabulous and raise
healthy children the good news is life
is long you may live till 120 like Moses
and I think of your generation you're
younger than me but um I think you
probably will live well over a hundred
um and so what that means is you have
many many many many many many years to
have a fabulous career when your
children don't need you so much but you
have a very small
window to create that emotional security
for your children that will be the core
of them you know we talk a lot about
your physical core and core training
this is your emotional core this is the
emotional core of human beings
attachment security and a feeling of
safety that you can rely on the people
who you need most in the world to be
there when you need them that is your
emotional
core how did you manage your mother of
three you've raised three very wonderful
well adjusted children but you're also
successful yeah you have books you
you're you're traveling around the world
you said so I'm a good example um I had
a career when I was in my 20s
um and I got married when I
was I met my husband when I was 27 and I
got married when I was just shy of 30 or
I was
30 um and then we had children in our
30s uh so before we had children I was
working I was seeing something like 40
hours of patience a week and I was
working into the we hours of the night I
would work till 11:00 at night coming
home
exhausted then we had children but it
was an agreement that we had that when
we had babies I would take a good long
period off and then really go back very
very very minimally and I had the kind
of career by choice that I could have
control over and be it could be flexible
and I could control it and so I took six
months off with each child and then
after six months only went back to work
an hour and a half a day five days a
week so just we had an agreement my
husband and I which is it would be just
enough to pay a mother's helper a nanny
and so and we did without in those years
we did without vacations we did without
you know second homes we did without
fancy clothes we did without the other
things that many of our peers were
getting and traveling and doing we said
what's important to us is that we pair
down not expand now this is we're
expanding as parents so we want to pair
down materially life is long and you can
have a successful career some of the
women that I interview for my book are
women who didn't even start their
careers until they were in their 40s
after they had children that were older
could it have worked if your husband
stayed home instead of you in your view
because I'm trying to understand if
you're saying that dads don't need to be
as their present as much as the mother
they have to be there in a different way
in the early days men don't breastfeed
so that's the first thing unless you can
show me a man who has grown breasts and
can actually breastfeed maybe it's
coming I don't know but for now um
women's bodies connect them to their
babies they connect them through birth
they connect them through breastfeeding
there is a physical component and a
hormonal component to infancy and
motherhood and there really is a
difference in the way that mothers
respond to babies and fathers respond to
babies now when the fathers become
really important it's not that the
father isn't important to give the
mother a break or to bond with the baby
or to bathe the baby but what that baby
needs is that attachment security to
that primary attachment figure so the
mother usually the mother sometimes it's
the father but usually the mother
fathers with their playful tactile
stimulation they become really important
when children become mobile when
children start to crawl and toddle when
they're around 18 months to 2 years old
fathers become incredibly exciting and
they're really important so when fathers
aren't around in those days um when
children are starting to explore the
world those children have a harder time
separating from mothers so it's really
important to have what we said the yin
and the Yang what we are doing now is we
are um not prioritizing attachment
security which is the foundation for
then healthy separation and when healthy
separation starts fathers are critical
when you have another child a second
child fathers are critical because
fathers seduce the older child they say
come on let's go out and play Let's go
kick the soccer ball let's go to the
swing set and they give a space to the
mother with the next baby they help the
older children to grow up earlier on you
mentioned a study that I read about when
I was studying psychology Once Upon a
Time which is the Reus the reesus monkey
study with the wire mother for anybody
that's never heard about that study I
think it's quite important to understand
the profound impact that touch and um
well that was an attachment study yeah
what was it what's what's touch called
from in a in the Science World skin to
skin skin to skin can you give me an
overview of that study and what it
showed for people that aren't aware of
it well they took these baby reesus
monkeys and they they let some be with
the mothers and the mothers nurtured
those babies and those babies became
healthily attached and secure and those
were the healthy emotionally Healthy
Babies then they gave um another subset
of monkeys um a wire mother covered with
a piece of cloth or fur or something and
those babies became very neurotic but at
least they were clinging they became
like the ambivalent attachment babies
because there was no response from the
mother but at least they were holding on
to this mother and then they gave and
these Bab babies became very neurotic
and then they gave the subset of babies
nothing and those babies literally lost
their
minds and um I mean there are other
studies which are more recent than that
that's quite an old study there there is
a researcher named Michael meanie he did
a study on licking and grooming animals
who lick and groom their young meaning
are nurturing skinto skin lick and groom
uh in human terms that would be holding
touching loving skin skin those uh if if
a mother licked and groomed her
young that baby would become more
resilient to stress in the future the
babies who were not licked and groomed
by their mothers become became less
resilient to stress in the future in
addition the babies who were more
resilient to stress because their
mothers had licked and groomed them
passed down generationally the ability
to lick and groom the Next
Generation what happened to the baby who
weren't licked and groomed guess what
happened they didn't pass it down right
and that's what's happening to humans
today if we don't lick and groom our
babies I mean you know take it for
whatever um if we don't lick and groom
our babies it we don't pass on
resilience to stress and adversity but
we also don't pass on the desire to lick
and groom you're to have babies your
story going back to your story which we
were talking about are there any areas
of privilege that you need to
acknowledge that someone else listening
to this now goes yeah but that's all
right for you because you know maybe
someone who didn't have a partner there
or someone who is in
a difficult economic situ extremely
difficult economic situation living in
the projects in Harlem or something I
really want to I'm saying this because
well it's not the mothers and the
projects in Harlem because I'll tell you
the mothers in the projects in Harlem
stay home with their babies that's
what's interesting very poor people in
America so let me just say I love
America America sucks and I'll tell you
why America sucks from my perspective
and I say this internationally I go
around the world saying America sucks
and I'm going to tell you why um we are
the only country in the world other than
Papa new guini who does not have a paid
parental maternity leave we do not have
paid maternity
leave nobody cares about children they
care about the GDP and the bottom line
and the people who are out there talking
about this stuff are economists saying
women have to work work work for the
economy nobody cares about children
because if we cared about children our
tax money would be in paid leave not for
three months not for six months for at
least a year and hungry they have three
years Slovenia
Slovakia um Estonia has three years
Hungary I think has 2 years of paid
leave Sweden I have some issues with
Sweden but Sweden has 14 months Sweden
after 14 months makes women go back to
work full full full-time and put them in
institutional care and all those babies
are breaking down so 14 months isn't
even enough so but if we could even get
to a civilized place of one year of paid
leave in this
country and then the next two years some
way that parents could be complemented
so they could part-time supplemented so
they could work part-time um you know
I'm a I'm a reasonable realistic person
I know this country is never going to go
for three years of pay leave even though
I would love them to I also know that
this country isn't going to go for an
entitlement called pay leave because
that's the kind of country we are we
talk a big game but we don't want to put
our money where mou this there is the
possibility now that the Republicans are
in of a creative solution which is
potentially using things like Social
Security in advance borrowing from your
social security so I'm a
mom and I say ah to stay home I can
borrow from my social security for a
year and then work a year or two longer
in my life wouldn't you say that most
women who wanted to stay home with their
babies would say I'll work longer so I
can stay home with my baby there are
ways to creatively deal with it um from
my perspective this is what's going on
people on the left will not compromise
they'll only do an entitlement called
paid leave but they only are asking for
it for 3 to 6 months after that they
want women back in the workforce and
institutional dayare so I'm not on the
left um people on the right talk a lot
about family they're the party of the
family now but they do not want tax
dollars to go into PID leave they they
don't like the entitlements that already
exist and they don't want to add anymore
and so the only way they're going to
give it to women and men is if they put
skin in the game M this is the country
we live in again I'm a realist I think
in any way that we can give families the
choice to care for their own children
particularly in the early years we will
create a population of healthier
children how do we know that more paid
leave equals better children less strain
on the Healthcare System in terms of
mental health mortality whatever it
might be how do you make a statistical
or a science or research backed case
that if we had three years of paid leave
in the United States or in the UK or
Australia Canada wherever that the it
would be a net positive for society
outside of it just being an
opinion well the research shows the
longitudinal attachment research shows
that children who are insecurely
attached at 12 months of age 20 years
later are insecurely 80% of them are are
insecurely attached and suffer from
mental
disorders that's what the longitudinal
attachment research says so we now have
Decades of basically children were
followed from when they were infants and
the ones who were securely attached 20
years later are still securely attached
and doing great and the ones who were
insecurely attached most still
insecurely attached and it's tied and
correlated to all of these mental
illness conditions right so there's a
lot of research to show what attachment
security does for children in the long
run so you know you're asking a question
about I mean I suppose you could take
your paid leave and go play soccer in
the park and go play tennis and I don't
know like play cards with your F I mean
you know how can I say how people are
going to use their paid leave but if
your paid leave is being used to be home
with your child then it's going to
benefit your child so many of the the
guests that I speak to on this pod C
especially those that become incredibly
successful um athletes entrepreneurs
whoever they often have some form of
neglect in their past Richard Williams
Serena and Venus Williams father he um
he was very intense with them from a
very young age and he's raised two of
the greatest tennis players in history
Joe Jackson was strict and often
controversial with Michael who went on
to become the King of Pop El Woods who
was Tiger Wood's father was very um
intense in his Co coaching and mentoring
style which led him to become great and
obviously Beyonce is the other example I
gave who Matthew managed Matthew which
is Matthew and Tina who were parents to
Beyonce managed Destiny's Child and
Beyonce's solo career meticulously
shaping them into a global Superstar so
parents think you know I want to raise
kids that are superstars I want I want
my kids to be great okay so I'm gonna
say right now I don't recommend that as
a professional okay I'm just saying so I
can't comment on a lot of those people
because I could get in a lot of trouble
for commenting on a lot of those people
but I will say that amongst those people
there is controversy
meaning at least one of those parents
and I don't know the history of the
others was abusive and so you could say
that narcissism is abusive to children
when we project our needs and desires
and likes and who we are onto our
children we're not letting them
authentically be themselves the greatest
gift you can give your child is to see
your child as an authentic individual
who is an individual and themselves and
not to see them as a mini me um when you
start architecting their life there's a
good chance you're going to lose that
child emotionally at some point they're
either going to hate you they're they
may be successful in their careers they
may have terrible personal lives they
may be narcissistic parents themselves
so I don't recommend that school of
thought what I do recommend is if your
child shows promise in something that
they also seem to love and have a drive
to be good at then you can support that
drive just make sure to keep yourself in
check along the way to make sure that
they are driving it not you health is a
huge Focus for me in 2025 and I'm not
just talking about eating right and
exercising I'm talking about my recovery
too I'm halfway through 60 workouts in
60 days and to help my body recover I've
been using a health Gadget that I've
shared with you before they're a sponsor
of this podcast and their product has
such a huge impact on my recovery I'm
referring to my Bon charge infrared SAA
blanket these are similar to the
infrared saers that you see in gyms and
Spas but the big difference is that it's
portable I started the year off at my
home in South afca so I brought the
blanket with me and I used it most
nights before bed when I was training
hard and it helped me relax it helped my
muscles feel less sore and I wake up
feeling more recovered it works by
heating up your body directly rather
than just the air around you to improve
circulation and reduce stiffness I've
also noticed that it's had a big impact
on my skin as well and thankfully Bon
Chargers offered me 25% off for my
listeners so if you use code diarhea
checkout you'll also get free shipping
and a yearlong warranty
head to bond charge.com
diary ADHD yeah okay a I don't feel like
I don't even have to ask a question here
but just to set the stage the reason why
I'm so compelled by this is just this I
have to say it the shocking rise in
diagnosis and prescriptions over the
last 10 years between 20 20 208 ADHD
diagnosis is in the UK Rose
approximately 20 fold yes among boys
aged 10 to 16 diagnosis increased from
1% roughly to um about 3.5% in 2018 and
in men aged 18 to 29 there was a nearly
50-fold increase in ADHD prescriptions
during the same period and the same
applies to the United States where an
estimated 15.5 million adults in the US
have been diagnosed with ADHD
approximately one in nine us children
have been diagnosed with ADHD at some
point with 10.5% having a current
diagnosis it I don't know what ADHD was
but the conversation around it the
prescriptions the diagnosis seemed to
have really surged into culture in a
really really big way what's going on so
ADHD was one of the factors that drove
me to right right being there um because
I was seeing this huge uptick and ADHD
diagnosis and children being medicated
so so early do you know what the fight
ORF flight reaction is that's when the
sympathetic nervous
system starts to kick into action and
yes so well it's basically our
evolutionary response to uh predatorial
threat so if a sablet tooth tiger was
chasing
you you either stood and fought fight or
you ran for Your Life
Flight so when our children are under
stress they go into fight or
flight so one of the first signs that a
child is under stress that they cannot
manage is when they become aggressive in
school they hit they bite they throw
chairs um they have trouble you know
socially
in daycare or preschool or even in
school or they become distracted which
is the flight part of fight ORF flight
so what's happening is their nervous
systems the stress regulating part of
their brain is getting turned on so we
say that the stress regulating part of
their brain has to do with a little
almond shaped part of the brain called
the amydala it's a very primitive part
of the brain very old part of the brain
and it regulates stress throughout our
lives it helps us to manage it what we
know is that part of the brain is
supposed to remain offline for the first
year to three years which is why mothers
wear babies on their bodies it's why
babies stay close close to their mothers
in the first 3 years to keep the amydala
quiet and only incrementally
incrementally expose children to stress
and frustration that they can manage so
imagine taking small bites of it so you
can digest it right and your mother's
there to help you digest the stress what
we're doing now by separating mothers
and babies by putting babies into
daycare with
strangers um is by sleep training babies
all these weird things that we're doing
to babies is we're turning the amydala
on we're making it active precociously
too early what happens when the amydala
is activated too early is it becomes
very active and very large very
quickly the problem is then it shrivels
up and burns out also because it cannot
manage that kind of stress so early when
it ceases to be functional it ceases to
be functional for a
lifetime and so it's very important to
protect you know what's the expression
the Family Jewels it's very these are
the family jewels in the brain of a baby
this is the jewel the amydala you want
to keep the stress to an absolute
minimum in the first year which is why
sleep training is dangerous it's why
letting babies cry it out it's why
putting babies into daycare it's why
leaving babies for hours on end when
they're so so very
fragile um is so bad for their brains
because it gets the cortisol flowing
which is the stress hormone but it makes
this part of the brain very active so it
grows grows grows and
then and ceases to be functional in the
future like a PTSD response so what we
know is that these children are in hyper
Vigilant states of stress ADHD children
ADHD children hypervigilant states of
stress
if you stay in a hypervigilant state of
stress long enough you go into a hypo
Vigilant state of stress which then
causes
depression so what we have now are not
disorders so there was a whole movement
to take the d off of ADH D because it's
not a disorder it is a stress response
and instead of asking the right
questions which are okay what's causing
the stress
how do we make sure that our children
are not exposed to this kind of stress
because they're going into fight or
flight so the nervous system as you said
the brain has an on switch and an off
switch the on switch to stress is the
amydala the hippocampus is the off
switch and you'd say the stress response
is in a negative feedback loop it's it's
it's actually important like in other
words if a sabl tooth tiger is chasing
you very important that you can activate
right and run or fight so the stress
response is supposed to be
shortterm it's supposed to be not it's
supposed to be acute rather than chronic
so we can kind of manifest it we can uh
activate it but then it's supposed to be
turned off by the turnoff switch the
hippocampus what we're seeing in
children's brains is that the amydala is
growing very precociously large and the
hippocampus which is the off switch is
very small so we have problem as we say
Houston we have a problem we have an on
switch going full speed gas no brakes
and no off switch and that's causing
ADHD behavioral problems that
are hugely rising in children in school
a lot of aggression and violence and so
that's what's happening this is a stress
response and again instead of asking the
right questions like where is this
coming from what's causing the stress
instead we silence the children
children's pain we tell we tell parents
we'll medicate it and we'll just relieve
the
symptoms for me that's malpractice the
way we treat ADHD is malpractice a child
develops goes into fight ORF flight when
they are under stress it could be
psychosocial stressors at home in the
family it could be at school it could be
with their friends it could be a
learning disability there's so many
things that can cause kids stress so
instead of medicating them why why don't
we figure out what's happening to that
child deeply that's causing them to go
into fight or flight isn't that point of
view I've got two questions here the
first is how do you know that it's
stress and the second is if it is stress
then that the problem or at least the
Inconvenient Truth that that then
creates is that the parent is
responsible yes that's the there's the
Inconvenient Truth for that child's ADHD
yes yes that's the Inconvenient Truth
it's not so simple sometimes it's the
family usually it's the family
particularly with small children but
when children get to school it could be
social as I said you know you can't
control whether your children are
exposed to social issues or bullying or
there's many things that can cause
stress in children but when they're very
little you are their environment so the
Inconvenient Truth is that when your
child gets an ADHD diagnosis the first
thing you should do is go to a therapist
who will do parent Guidance with you
don't rush that child to a psychiatrist
to medicate them you go with your
partner or spouse and talk to a parent
guidance expert about what could be
causing this child to feel such stress
and look at the psychosocial stressors
look at the influences and the Dynamics
in this child's life that would be
causing them to go into a state of
stress like this give me some examples
of the type of stresses the everyday
stresses that we're now exposing
children to that are leading to ADHD in
your opinion well again let's start at
home at home the stresses might be that
they
were handed over to a daycare center at
an early age um which turned that
amygdala response on which turned the
stress regulating part of their brain on
too early now you have that
hypervigilant reaction and they can't
turn it off right um it could be a
divorce situation 50% of couples divorce
which means that div divorce is an
adversity you know I have a book coming
out in a year about how to divorce and
mitigate the impact of the divorce on
the child but no matter what a divorce
is an adversity on a child and a stress
um when parents fight uh dramatically in
the home if there's uh tremendous
sibling rivalry issues in the home if
there's the birth of another child
that's stressful right if you have a
sibling believe it or not that's a very
stressful thing if parents are sensitive
about that then it can be mitigated but
if parents are insensitive about the
birth of a second child and the feelings
that your first child may have that can
cause stress moving can cause stress
illness or mental illness in a parent
can cause stress alcoholism any kind of
addiction can cause stress a grandparent
or uncle or Aunt or even a parent
getting sick and dying can cause I mean
there are so many things that can cause
stress but the point is that stress can
be regulated but it can only only be
regulated if parents are introspective
and self-aware and willing to look at
their part in it if parents hand a child
over to a psychiatrist and say fix my
child of course psychiatrists will
cooperate with you and silence your
child's pain but is that really what you
want to be doing um because in the end
you're just putting your finger in a
dyke you're putting your finger in a dam
and eventually that dam is going to
burst what' you say to some of the
evidence around there being a link to a
hereditary component in twin studies
they found that ADHD is about 74 to 80%
heritable making one of the most
genetically influenced psychiatric
conditions let me tell you a different
study that will help you to understand
that
study which is that we know that there
is no genetic precursor to mental
illness there is no genetic precursor to
ADHD there is no genetic precursor to
depression and no genetic precursor to
anxiety what you mean by precurser
meaning there's no genetic connection
you don't get it in your genes if your
father or your mother were depressed you
get it by something called the
inheritance of acquired
characteristics if you're raised by a
depressed parent you're more likely to
become depressed it's the nature nurture
argument okay but what they did
find now schizophrenia has a genetic
connection bipolar disorder those have
genetic but the rest do not anxiety
depression ADHD no genetic gentics what
they did find is a genetic tie to
something called the sensitivity
Gene it's a short Al on the serotonin
receptor and serotonin as we know is
used to regulate happy emotions to
regulate emotions right so when you have
a short Al it means that you have a
harder time picking up the serotonin but
it also means that you are more
sensitive to stress
now those children who are born with
this Gene this short Al on the serotonin
receptor
gene they are more prone to mental
illness later on because of that
sensitivity to
stress what the study shows is if those
children who are born with that Gene for
sensitivity are provided with
emotionally and physically present
attachment Security in the first year
it neutralizes the expression of that
Gene so epigenetics means that we're
born with genes like you might have a
gene for rheumatoid arthritis or you
might have a gene for cancer but it
never gets expressed well we all have
genes for something but they don't
necessarily get expressed that's what
epigenetics is it means the environment
has to turn on the gene to make it let's
rock and roll right um what it showed in
this study is that the children who were
born with this genetic precursor this
sensitivity ity to stress if they had
sensitive empathic nurturing and present
parents in the first year it neutralized
the expression of that Gene so those
children could be as healthy as children
born without that Gene if however
children born with that sensitivity Gene
were neglected you know abandoned not
provided with sensitive empathic present
nurturing it exacerbated that Gene so we
know that that sensitivity Gene tied and
correlated to mental illness later on
unless the sensitive empathic nurturing
mitigates that Gene and what you say to
people that point to MRI
scans fmis and yeah there's there's all
kinds of um neurological tests now where
we can see the brain in action so it's
not a static thing we can actually see
the blood flow to the brain we can see
the electrical activity in the brain
it's it's amazing actually but some
people say that this proves that it's
the way your brain is and lots of my
friends that have ADHD when they talk
about their ADHD or the way that they
are they say my brain works like this no
it's not correct their brain is
sensitive to stress someone with ADHD is
more sensitive to stress so you could
ask them questions like this you could
say were you more are you a more
sensitive person are you more sensitive
to noise to Smells to touch when you
were a child did you not like itchy
things did you cry more were you more
sensitive when your parents would go out
for the night were you more sensitive
when your mom would go to work or were
you more sensitive when you were left at
Nursery School um and they're probably
going to say yes but if they say no and
they still have an ADHD diagnosis I
would guarantee almost guarantee they
wouldn't say no because people with ADHD
are people who are
sensitive sensitivity is an amazing
strength if it's met with sensitivity
if you have a sensitive child so what
does a sensitive child look like if you
have multiple children then you know
because the first thing I'll do when I
give a public talk is I'll say okay any
everybody here who has a sensitive child
and I describe okay sensitive child is a
child who cries more is harder to soothe
um is more clingy doesn't like you
leaving them is harder has a harder time
separating has a harder time going to
sleep and being left to sleep on their
own um is sensitive to things like noise
and smells and touch and if you grew up
in an environment that was stressful and
again we've you've identified that
stress can come in many forms it could
be arguing parents it could be a
neighbor or whatever some environmental
factor that caused that stress you are
sensitive you developed ADHD you become
an adult you get diagnosed at 30 years
old as having ADHD yeah you're offered
medication you take the medication the
medication makes you much more
functional in your career in your
relationships in your life
it's a stimulant and so what stimulants
do is they cause they can cause great
anxiety they can cause panic attacks in
adolescence uh they can cause growth
issues so uh I have patients who come to
me young men who didn't grow because
they were put on stimulants when they
were young so um in in in terms of the
consequences of using stimulants the
jury is still out but we know that they
cause growth issues they cause panic
attacks they cause anxiety disorders
they cause
depression they're quite life saving
they're quite life-saving for some
people in terms of having a they can be
they can be so what I would say is if
you have tried everything to uncover
what the stress is that's causing you to
react this way and you still are feeling
that way then sometimes medication can
be a lifesaver the problem is that we
turn to
medication uh in in adolescen and
children and young adult we we turn to
it as a performance
drug um because there's so much stress
in Modern Life and there's such a need
for people to perform and be successful
in their careers and in school and get
good grades there's so much pressure on
kids so you know I'm 60 and we didn't
have this kind of pressure growing up
and so so the generations that follow
have so much pressure that pressure
makes children literally go off the
rails we could talk about the academic
pressure the
competitiveness the
perfectionism um it so
ADHD is a bucket it's a bucket which you
throw people in who have anxiety that
has never been treated and so and
there's different ways of thinking about
treatment too so we are a society that
likes superficial quick fixes we like
drugs we like CBT therapy the truth is
that this is not not a quick
fix figuring out relationally
dynamically what happened to you as a
child what your losses were what your
traumas were what caused you to feel so
anxious what's caused you to go into
fight ORF flight is hard work it
requires frustration it requires
commitment it requires going to someone
who can think very deeply with you you
know I I want to
Define what anx is because I think it's
really
important because we rarely Define
depression and anxiety um depression is
preoccupation with past
losses
anxiety is
preoccupation with future losses that
may never occur what do they have in
common it's all about losses all about
loss and you could say the generations
now are very preoccupied with
loss loss of status
achievement but because we're also very
preoccupied with
gain well we're preoccupied with I what
I say the I you know I don't want to
judge but I want to say the unimportant
things in life um what are the important
things in life
relationships love
connection Health right you would say
objectively family these are the
important things in life but we've
become very preoccupied with material
success
money uh career achievements Fame I
think there was a study that interviewed
teenagers um and it was really
discouraging because they said that the
thing they wanted more in life than
anything was to be famous and so we're
preoccupied with the wrong things
on this point of stress in the link with
ADHD um looking at some research from
the injury.com research education group
um it says that children with an ace
score which is the trauma B score where
I think it goes up to 10 different sort
of questions with an a score of four or
more so four experiences of trauma or
more have nearly four times which is
400% more chance of having parent
reported ADHD compared to children with
no Aces yeah and some of the factors
that have big impact is soo
socioeconomic hardship increases your
probability of having ADHD by 40%
parental Divorce by 35% familial mental
illness or a parent having a mental
illness increases it up to almost 60%
55% I believe and neighborhood violence
almost 50% familial incarceration so if
a parent goes to prison then that
increases your probability of ADHD by
about 40% as well and that's published
by the I think it's the New England
yeah what is oh the National Library of
Medicine National Center of biological
information yeah so remember what I said
that you can't control everything that
happens to your child divorces do happen
and adversities happen to Children
Health health issues happen to Children
what you can control is you can control
the first three years and be as present
as possible for your child so if my kid
start screaming in a supermarket m one
of the prevailing pieces of advice says
just walk off or start screaming
yourself as the parent to show them do
am I supposed to just ignore my child
when it's screaming and throwing a
tantrum am I meant to drop what I'm
doing and go and Cat to them what am I
meant to do in these situ you have me on
speed dial Stephen you be careful
because if you make a promise like that
I promise I promise I'll be on speed you
want to drop your career and focus on
raising my children you you can no but
you can call me you got this on video
speed that's legally binding no you can
have me on speed doll how much um yeah
you can as much as you want so the deal
is you don't yell at your children an
emotionally regulated parent a healthy
parent produces a healthy child so what
is a healthy parent a healthy parent is
a parent who feels good about themsel
who has authentically good self-esteem
not grandiosity but really feels good
about themselves knows their strengths
and limitations and overall as a whole
person feels good about themselves um
they have the capacity to regulate their
emotions to keep their emotions from
going too high and too low remember
sailing in the Caribbean meaning they
can stay calm in a storm um is sensitive
and empathic as a nurturer these are
signs of Health in a in a parent so if
my kid says I want that pack of sweets
and I go you you you can't have the pack
of sweets well first you have to so
before you discipline you always want to
be empathic first so I always say that
that if you are going to discipline a
child first you have to recognize how
they feel I mean recognize recognizing
how children feel is important anyway
meaning when you recognize a child's
feelings if they're sad you mirror their
sadness if they're angry you say I can
see you're angry if they're happy you
look happy with them that kind of
reflection is the way that your child
knows that you acknowledge them that
they're a person to you that they're a
separate person to you it's how they
feel valuable so when you acknowledge
their feelings that's the first critical
you'd say parenting 101 acknowledge your
child's feelings so I would turn to my
child and say you want sweets are you
hungry yeah you can say I can see that
you really want that packet of sweets I
can see how hard it is because you
really want it but you know you can't
have it before dinner you know that's
the rule and then they stop screaming
and cry and then they start screaming
and you say broken record is a
communication style where you say oh I
can see it's really hard for you but
just still can't have the sweets and you
stay with them and you keep empathizing
and then setting structure empathizing
structure empathizing structure the
mistake that parents make is that they
go right into the no word they don't use
empathy they don't bring empathy in and
the truth is that even as an adult if
somebody just says no without first
recognizing how you feel you feel very
unsatisfied right for a child it's
critical it's critical that even when
you have to say no and particularly if
you have to say no that you first
recognize how they feel I mean that's
what all the relationship experts on the
show tell me they say if you want to be
successful in a romantic relationship
then you first must make your partner
feel heard and understood that's right
even if you disagree in an argument
first acknowledge what they said maybe
repeat it back to them and then they'll
feel heard and understood and it kind of
stops the broken record do you think
that I'm a traumatized child I don't
know I haven't heard about your
traumatized background if so if you have
a trauma I would say we're all so let me
say this there's this word trauma is
used a lot can I just talk about it for
a
moment there's something called Big tea
trauma right big tea traumas is like I
was in a car accident and I lost my legs
or um you know I lost my parents you
know my mother died of brain cancer or
my my father was an alcoholic and beat
me or you know there's there are things
that are more concrete that you can like
hold on to things that happened to
people yeah I was raped or you know
those are big tea
trauma but believe it or not probably
fewer people suffer from Big tea trauma
and more people suffer from little tea
trauma and little tea
trauma is more
nuanced it's um it it requires looking
with a with a finer tooth comb at at the
issues it's more relational it's more I
was subtly neglected by my mother my
mother wasn't a good listener my mother
loved me but my father loved me but he
never understood me uh my parents were
narcissistic and very
self-centered um they were never around
you know and so people will come into my
office and sit down individuals for
therapy and they'll say you know I don't
know what's wrong with me I had two
parents who stayed together I had all
the material wealth that I could need I
never wanted for Stuff uh you know my
parents stayed together and I don't know
what's wrong with me and so I say okay
so you're telling me nothing big and
traumatic happened to you in your life
now let's talk about the
nuance and we're not very nuanced
anymore so we don't want to look at what
causes most forms of mental illness
depression
anxiety uh even ADHD are the relational
nuances of a family and what do you mean
by the relational nuances it could be
the neglect neglect being ignored having
a mentally ill parent that no one knows
about maybe a depressed mother who
sleeps in in the morning and doesn't get
up and feed you you know you get up and
feed yourself or uh maybe you're a
latchkey kid who comes home and and
you're isolated and alone or things that
people can't
see um but you see and so that's why
people I would say most people go into
therapy not for big tea traumas believe
it or not even though the aces study
says you know alcoholism drug addiction
of course those are big tea traumas most
people come into therapy for little te
trauma and and the reason why it's it's
quite difficult for those people is
there's not a lot of reinforcement from
society that those are also traumas but
in fact they are traumas attachment
trauma you know if you were put in
daycare and you so I have patients who
come to me and say I can remember being
put in daycare and you know you're not
supposed to remember things until the
age of four or five but some patients
can remember flashes of memory under
five and they'll say I was put into
daycare I just all I can remember is
screaming my lungs out for my momy
you're not a fan of daycare are you no
what's wrong with daycare
daycare raises salivary cortisol levels
in children the studies show be meaning
those babies are put into stressful
States uh at a very young age when their
brains are
developing daycare has been known to
increase aggression and anxiety and
behavioral problems in school in the
school years and those children are more
likely to develop attachment disorders
remember those first three years when
children are so very fragile and
vulnerable taking them away from your
body as a primary attachment figure and
handing them over to
strangers and leaving them there for
hours on
end will cause your child to have to
develop pathological defenses and that's
what those children are forced to do so
it is the least good option of child
care so let's talk about what are the
better options of child care if you have
to use child
care you know how we say breast is best
and it is for a variety of reasons but
the best is your primary attachment
figure for the first three years as much
as possible primary attachment
attachment figure you mean the mother
father well no it can be the father okay
it's the go-to person who's a sensitive
empathic nurturer so when that baby's in
distress that baby gets their emotional
needs met it can be the father it can be
the father but first the father has to
learn how to be a sensitive it doesn't
come naturally to most men with rare
exception I have known some patients
where the husband the father was more
sensitive than the mother it's possible
but in general instinctually fathers are
not sensitive and paic nurtures because
it's against their evolutionary Instinct
their evolutionary
Instinct if you were an animal on the
plains of
Africa you're uh you're you're a an
Impala you're a daddy Impala
your baby is born and it comes out
running cuz they are they're like born
and you're all running
together you get behind that baby and
you're like get going buddy you better
get going or you're going to be lunch
for that lion that's a father's instinct
is to protect it's protective aggression
right that's different than the baby
andala falls down and the mother comes
over and licks the baby and says are you
okay honey can I give you a hug can you
you know if and paa could talk um so
it's a different Instinct so fathers can
be taught to be primary attachment
figures but this is why I say it's so
very important that we recognize the
difference between men and women if we
just think they're exactly the same and
we put a throw a father into the mix
with an infant and the mother's going
out and the father's staying home if we
don't talk about this stuff and and talk
about it openly and say when the baby
cries you have to mirror the baby's
emotions you have to do skin to skin you
have to s soothe the baby not encourage
resilience not not distract the baby not
use discrepant emotions with the baby if
the baby's crying don't go oh you're
okay you'll be fine no no so it's really
important if the father's going to stay
home that he learns how to be a mother
you know sometimes gay couples will come
to me and I'll say um you know two gay
men will come I'll say which one of you
is going to be the mother now that may
seem Politically Incorrect but someone's
got to play that role you cannot have
two fathers for a child a child needs a
mother and a father if you're going to
have two men then one of them has to
play that sensitive empathic role the
other has to play the playful tactial
stimulation role same with two women who
are raising children it's better to have
a father and a mother than two mothers
so which of you is going to be the dad
which of you is going to rough house and
play basketball and roll the rounds on
the ground and tickle the baby and
encourage exploration and risk taking
and can't you both do half each like so
couldn't no no and I'll tell you why
it's very confusing to children they
when parents say I'm both mother and
father to my child I say no no is very
confusing to children they need to have
a mother figure and a father figure and
I say that knowing today's politics and
knowing today's social situation you can
have a mother figure who's not a mother
maybe it's a nanny maybe it's a
grandmother you need a mother figure and
you need that mother figure to be around
a lot
if that mother figure is the one who
provides the sensitive empathic
nurturing so some of this can be taught
but it can't be taught unless you first
acknowledge that there are differences
if we cannot as a society acknowledge
the Inconvenient Truth that men and
women are different in terms of their
nurturing behaviors then we can't teach
anybody anything I'm looking at some
stats here in front of me um on a graph
which I was just reading is as you're
explaining that because it seems to be
quite relevant and it shows that in 1960
one in 10 mothers were the sole primary
bread winner yeah now it's almost at
half it's on its way to half I know
almost half of mothers are the sole or
primary bread winner in
2016 so I mean these mothers can't just
quit their
jobs
so it's it's it's a good question I get
a lot of people coming to me and saying
and this is very common
I want to quit my job I want to
downscale I want to work
part-time but my husband won't support
it because I made a promise that I would
be the primary bread winner and now I
want to switch and he won't switch or he
doesn't support me giving up my
high-paying job but I feel this
transformation of being with my baby and
I don't want to leave my baby the
problem with young people is they
promise each other they make promises to
each other that they probably should not
make do not promise your spouse that
nothing will change when you have a baby
say to your spouse let's prepare for
everything to
change let's believe that anything is
possible and
let's prepare let's strategize let's say
what if I want to stay home with the
baby what if I I may not feel like that
now but what if I see this baby and I
fall in love with this baby and I want
to stay home and I'm the mother and I
want to breastfeed and I don't want to
go back to work for a while and and so
then you say what would that scenario
look like what could we do what could we
downscale in terms of our material life
and our
lifestyle that makes it possible for me
to stay
home and I don't think we do that
instead women say nothing's going to
change and men say nothing's going to
change and then they have babies and
they're not prepared for the change
changes that occur changes occur in men
too it's not just women I mean fathers
also can have this transformation right
um where they also want to work less or
you know sometimes the transformation
comes in the form of wanting to work
less and being home sometimes it comes
in the form of wanting to go out and
Take On The World so they can provide
for their you know but it does it does
stimulate something it stimulates some
evolutionary response in men and women
the hardest thing I find is when men and
women
compete it was much easier in the olden
days now not everything was good in the
olden days but you would say the idea
that roles were
defined meant that men and women didn't
compete over their roles now what I
think is causing a lot of these divorces
and what's causing a lot of marital
conflict is that men and women compete
over everything they compete over who's
going to make more money they compete
over who's going to care for the baby um
and so it's like you you're a CE CEO of
a company you had your own company so
you can't have co-ceos I mean I don't
know if you did but it doesn't work I
mean anybody that I've ever treated that
says we're going to do co-ceos it always
falls apart you can have a CEO you can
have a president you can have the head
of marketing you can have a CFO you can
have a COO these are different roles and
they don't compete with one another they
work work is a team parenting is a team
sport not a competitive Sport and so
what's happening today because of all
this gender neutrality and we're as I'm
as good as you and you're as good as me
and we're the same it means that couples
are competing with one another and
that's causing so much tension because
what's best is when couples compliment
each
other when their
differences mean that as a team they
work well to care for child and I would
say the secret to success in a marriage
is save your competition for the tennis
court for the basketball court for
running in the park but don't compete
over child rearing who's going to take
care of the children don't compete over
who makes more money find a way to
compliment each other and be a
team there's so many mothers listening
now that are very career- driven and you
may be causing some existential crisis
you may be affirming a lot of what they
believe and think and what they feel
intuitively um are you are you saying
then that for those women that are
pursuing you know high octane careers in
leadership roles that also want to have
children that it's one or the
other no I'm saying that there are
certain careers realistically here's the
Inconvenient Truth again bunch of
inconvenient
truths um there are certain careers that
that are harder to be a good
mother period I'm saying that I know
it's a harsh to but there it is there
are certain careers that are too
demanding to be present for your
children whether you're a mother or a
father you think if you're a father
who's a CEO who's traveling around the
world and misses your children's
birthday and misses your children's
soccer games and misses your children's
piano concerts and isn't there to pick
them up at school or have breakfast with
them or have dinner at the end of the
day you think that child is going to
have a healthy relationship with that
parent another myth here we are I told
you I was going to weave the myths in
quality versus quantity time you cannot
be there for your
children on your own time you have to be
there on their time meaning quality time
is a narcissistic fantasy I can be there
on my time so so my child sits at home
and is like a vase on the counter
waiting for me to come home and then I
come home and there I can be present for
my child your child has needed you all
day long and when you come home that's
your that's on your time you need to be
there a quality of time as well as a
quantity of time I always say to people
that you can be you can be physically
present but be emotionally checked out
but you can't be emotionally present if
you're not phys physically there enough
of the time and that's just a reality so
what are the careers that are really
good for whoever's going to be the
primary attachment figure service Fields
Fields where you have your own business
and you can make your own schedule
around your children where your children
don't work around you you work around
your children Physical Therapy
Psychotherapy speech therapy Consulting
Maybe um anything that's entrepreneurial
anything that is a service field CEO
podcaster investor entrepreneur no I'm
going to disagree with you I'm going to
say you can but you have to be willing
to set limits with yourself so you have
to be willing to say do you know Monae
the painter yeah he was famous in his
own life now most painters have to be
dead to be famous and he painted on a
very modest schedule get a in the
morning to catch the light and then he'd
be done by like 3 or 4:00 in the
afternoon he'd have dinner with his
family you know we We Are The Architects
of our own lives kind of no not kind of
I'm representing the opinion of some
people who might be listening I
obviously there's so who are the people
who can't architect their own lives you
want to be a who do you think I would
say hedge fun managers okay let me tell
you that so I was 18 years old Dr had a
university mhm um probably had sex that
year so if I had sex that year and had a
baby yeah and then I became a single
parent at the time I was I had two ccjs
I was broke I shoplifting food to feed
myself I'd printed off the doll forms I
had I never sent them in but the forms
where you get you know like government
assistance and I was working in call
centers working night shifts because
that was the best job I could get to pay
for the the rent that I had every month
if I had had a baby at that exact moment
in
time I don't think I would be the it
wouldn't it wouldn't resonate with me
what you're saying about being the
architect of my own destiny because
there is like immediate emergencies I
can't I can't feed myself let alone a
kid so I'll tell you and I also didn't
have any family within hours my mom had
basically disowned me because I dropped
out a university I was alone did you
have a baby at 18 no okay I haven't had
kids yet I'm hoping to okay so um first
of all it's a good reason to use birth
control and not have a baby at 18 but
okay let's put that aside for a second
let's put that aside for a second let's
say that what we should be promoting in
this world I'm going to say this it's
controversial is that whoever is the
primary attachment figure has a career
that they have control over and
flexibility maybe the other person
doesn't maybe the other person works for
someone or whatever but in my book I
interview a lot of different women from
a lot of different socioeconomic
backgrounds and one of the women that I
interviewed was a
nanny and she said she had three
children and she said that the way that
I rais my children because I was a
single mother raising three children I
had to work to pay the rent she said but
I made sure that I didn't work past 5:00
I never worked past 5:00 I'd come home
at 5:00 I didn't go out at night people
would say let's go I said no my children
this is my time with my children so I
don't go out at night I don't go out on
weekends I'm with when I'm not working I
am with my children and my children knew
that I had to work but the way I used my
free time was very
carefully um she also said to me and
again a number of there are a number of
interviews in there she also said that
the people who she left her children
with she never used daycare she had
extended family watch her child so her
neighbor who was her dear friend she
paid to watch her child and so that
person was auntie and that person was
like family and was in that child's life
forever so what I say about child care
is there are different levels of
importance so the first the best is your
primary attachment figure next best is
kinship bonds family or extended family
someone who has a similar investment to
that child as you do even even if the
kid's going to be raised alone at that
early age so versus going to daycare
will they'll be around other kids no no
children don't need other kids until the
age of three they do something called
parallel play what they need is
oneon-one connection they need
attachment security and they need their
emotional needs met by one person
oneon-one
um after three then the beginning of
preschool then they start to actually
interact with one another until then
they're not playing together they're
just doing parallel play so that's
another myth the myth that Day Care is
good for children for socialization no
children don't need socialization before
three unless their mother's with them so
what I say is do play dates do play
groups but be within eye gaze or ear
earshot of a child meaning there's
something called um reprosa which is
emotional refueling so when children
start to explore when you've given them
emotional security and they feel so
secure that you're going to be there
then they start to take chances they
start to take risks they start to toddle
off that's where the word Tod toddler
came from they toddle away but guess
what they do for emotional
security they look back and they say ah
she's there it's okay and then they keep
playing or they run back and get a hug
and then they run off again you are
their Touchstone of security and that's
how children become courageous that's
how they develop the ability to explore
and still feel secure your gut and my
gut is the home of our digestion and
it's also a gateway to Better Health but
it can be hard to know what's going on
in there Zoe who sponsors this podcast
has one of the largest microbiome
databases on the planet and one of the
world's most advanced at home gut health
tests their blood sugar sensor which I
have in this box in front of me goes on
your arm so you can see how different
foods impact your blood sugar then
there's the at home blood sample which
is really easy and analyzes your body's
blood fat and of course the f
blue Zoe cookie which tests your
metabolism oh and I can't forget there's
also a poo sample which is a critical
step in understanding the health of your
microbiome and you post it all to Zoe
and you get your results back which will
help you to understand your body's
response to different foods using your
results Zoe's app will also create a
personalized nutrition plan for you and
this is exactly why I invested in the
business so my question to you is how
healthy is your gut head to zoe.com to
order your kit and find out and because
you're one of our listeners use code
Steven 10 for 10% off your membership
head to zoe.com now as you guys know
whoop is one of my show sponsors it's
also a company that I have invested in
and it's one that you guys asked me
about a lot the biggest question I get
asked is why I use whoop over other
wearable technology options and there is
a bunch of reasons but I think it really
comes down to the most overlooked yet
crucial feature it's non-invasive nature
when everything in life seems to be
competing for my attention I turn to
whoop because it doesn't have a screen
and will armed the CEO who came on this
podcast told me the reason that there's
no screen because screens equal
distraction so when I'm in meetings or
I'm at the gym my whoop doesn't demand
my attention it's there in the
background constantly pulling data and
insights from my body that are ready for
when I need them if you've been thinking
about joining whoop you can head to
join. woop.com
CEO and try whoop for 30 days risk-free
and zero commitment that's join.
whoop.com CEO
let me know how you get on you keep
mentioning but 3 years old yes why three
years old and there's kind of like two
SE segments to this question that I was
Keen to understand is there an element
of neuroplasticity that makes the age of
three so important and the other kind of
sub question I was trying to figure out
in my head was is the damage we do
before 3 years old to a child
inadvertently at all reversible okay and
is it damage so plasticity
there are certain what we call critical
periods of right or social emotional
brain development one is 0 to three and
it's the most important because what's
happening is something called
neurogenesis so it's the growth of cells
and your presence as a parent who
provides Safety and Security buffers
your child from stress regulates their
emotions is critical to them growing
that right brain because 85% of their
right brain is developed by three crazy
right
85% and you being there changes the
architecture of that brain that's how
important you are like people come up to
me in cocktail parties and they'll say
to me ah I don't have to be there my
babies just sleeping and pooping and you
know they don't need me I'm going to be
around when they're talking and walking
I'm like
no like you got it wrong I'm like you
have to be here now because now is when
the cell GR growth is happening you
every time a baby snuggles and takes the
breast and looks at you with their eyes
and you sing to them thousands millions
of synapses are firing okay so you have
think of a
garden by three years of age you're
growing a garden I know because I just
started a garden where I have vegetables
and flowers and it's abundant it's an
abundant I love my garden this is an
abundant Garden of brain isssue okay if
you do it right it grows it overgrows
you know the flowers the vegetables it's
growing crazy okay now they go into
childhood after 3 years old they go into
childhood and for from 3 years old till
about 9 years
old it's still growing but it's not
growing at the same pace so say that
it's still like growing a little like
like it the garden grows in one big
burst and then little bursts so from 3
to 9 it's still growing right but not
not to the same degree as the first
critical period of brain development now
adolescence comes 9 to
25 and now you have to prune back the
garden because if you don't prune back
the cells you don't need it's as
damaging to the brain as if you didn't
grow them to begin with so in these two
critical Windows the
environment dictates do the sales grow
do they get
pruned and when they're really little
you're their environment you're it tag
you're it when they're an adolescence
you're a very important part of the
environment but not all of their
environment they have friends they have
school they have activities right and so
it's very important if you can get to
the first window to get there because
you don't know what's going to happen to
them and you want to fortify them right
you want to fortify them so when they
get adolescence which is really painful
and hard and a struggle that they have
the re the inner resources to to cope
with adolescence because it's so hard
adolescence right and it offers such
adversity social adversity academic
adversity right social media so both of
these periods are
important if you miss the first
window what 0 to three yes the title of
my second
book it's called Chicken Little the sky
isn't falling raising resilient
Adolescence in the New Age of Anxiety if
that isn't a mouthful do you know what
the title of the book was supposed to be
it was supposed to be second
chances oh okay and the title of Being
There was supposed to be called The Lost
Instinct so if you messed up your kids
you get a second chance second chance
and what do you do I want people to read
the book because it's more nuanced than
what I'm saying a lot of what you should
have done in the first three years you
got to be there you got to be there in a
different way you're not going to I mean
they're not little little so but when
they come home from school if you are
not there when the door swings open
everybody knows that teenagers close
their doors if they have
doors and that's their way of saying my
defenses are up go
away if parents work really hard and
then they come home and they go knock
knock knock I'm here to spend time with
you how how was your day that door is
closed closed baby
closed if you aren't there when the door
opens on its own on their terms if
you're not there when they're coming out
to get a snack or to take a pee or to
take a break from they're studying if
you are not there then and open for
business for communication the door
closes
again so it goes back to to this idea
that children need you when they need
you not when you're personally available
and if you miss that window it's not the
end of the world because you can a word
that we use is to repair you can repair
a lot of the damage but to repair the
damage you can't go back it's sort of
like going to a confessional if you're
Catholic you know you go in and you say
you know oh Father I you know I I
murdered somebody today and the the
priest says well you know say 12 hell
mares and I don't know I'm not Catholic
but you know but you can't go out and
murder again so if you're going to
repair it means that whatever happens
between you and your child you're trying
to be a better parent you're trying to
do things differently right you can't
take advantage of their good graces and
keep pushing them away pushing them um
but repair is possible because the brain
is plastic and it's always growing and
shrinking until it's not what if I'm 30
years old for example and I had a
traumatic upbringing can I repair myself
from the childhood trauma that I
experienced between the ages of zero and
10 the way that I would put it is it
takes a relationship to cause the trauma
and it takes another relationship to
repair
it so the thing that most people don't
understand about therapy
and why I really recommend psychodynamic
Psychotherapy some people would say
psychoanalytic therapy but a more
indepth kind of therapy that lasts
longer is because you develop a
relationship it's not that you are
healed from some pithy thing that the
therapist says I mean I wish I was so
smart that I could say this and you know
everybody would say you're you're a
genius and pay me millions of dollars
doesn't work like that therapy requires
the consistency of a relationship with
the therapist because it's through that
therapist seeing you through the ups and
downs of your life reflecting your
feelings it's it's a kind of emotionally
reparative experience but it's not what
the therapist says as much as the
relationship the long-standing
relationship with the therapist so
what's healing is the
relationship rather than the
interpretations and can that be a
romantic relationship that then course
corrects you in some regard okay so the
idea is that um to really heal it
requires relationships and those
relationships sometimes can be people
that you love the problem with people
that you love is that you end up
burdening those
people with you can burden overburden
the people that you love with your
conflicts your internal losses so you
know if you find yourself
using the people that you love like
therapists if you find that you're using
the people that you love um to to deal
with past losses I would say it can it
can corrupt the relationship so you have
to be careful so the reason to go to a
therapist would be to preserve the
relation it's not that you don't share
with the person that you love but you
don't want to overburden your friends or
your lovers with the burdens of your
childhood trauma right so I always say
that
therapy becomes like a safe container
you go to therapy you talk to your
therapist you develop this trusting
relationship where where everything is
is is left there so to speak in that
container until you come back but
therapy is not for everyone it requires
laying down your defenses it requires
the ability to be open and talk about
your feelings there are types of
therapies that you can go to if you
can't talk about your feelings things
like DBT or CBT but you know for the
most part healing therapy requires being
open it requires trusting you must
encounter a lot of people that are in
denial about their childhood trauma and
the role it's played in shaping who they
are because you'll have people come to
you I'm sure that are exhibiting adult
symptoms like maybe they can't form
relationships very well um maybe they've
got other forms of emotional eratic
behavior and there must be occasions
where you have a suspicion yeah that
it's linked to some Al experience and
they're in denial thinking about people
that I know that are have presenting
symptoms in their life really sort of
like chronic presenting symptoms but if
you were to ask them if their childhood
played a role they're almost like
defensive of their childhood so defenses
are
important defenses protect us so and
people also have a misunderstanding of
what therapy is about the kind of
therapy I'm a psychoanalyst so we don't
people think you go to therapy and they
take your defenses away from you I would
never take someone's defenses away
unless I could help them to replace them
with healthier defenses so what we do is
in exchange like you don't take your
foot off a landmine unless you have a
really big rock to put in its place
right so if you're going to let go of
one defense you have to trust the person
you're working with that you'll find a
better healthier defense to protect you
give me an example if you used
anxiety in child childhood if you use
the
anxiety
to to get
attention what if you complained as a
child and you went around and said you
know oh I you know I'm worried about
this and I'm and and so in a way it
serves a purpose that anxiety that um
that complaining that expression of
emotion it gets the attention from your
parents and suddenly and I do believe
that there's a lot of this going on a
lot of kids are breaking down and saying
I'm anxious I'm depressed I do think
many of them are but I also think that
many of them need their parents to
understand
them so that would be what I call it's a
defense but it's an unhealthy defense
because what ends up happening is that
the parents stop being able to hear them
because they complain and the anxiety
starts to grade on the parents and the
parents pull away right um and so what
would be a better defense for that child
is to learn how to express what they
need from their parents instead of just
saying I feel anxious or I feel
depressed but to actually say you know
Mom and Dad you don't really spend any
time with me you don't really and when
you're home you're distracted and you're
on your computer and your iPads and and
you're not you don't really seem that
interested in me and so that's a better
way of going about getting the attention
that they need so you're never taking
something away from someone unless you
have something better to give them and
that's a myth of therapy right so people
feel that they're going to go into
therapy and be left defenseless now
defensiveness which you mentioned is a
different thing entirely when someone is
defensive it means that it's um an
unhealthy defense it means that you hit
something so when you say to your friend
do you have any childhood trauma and
they say absolutely not what are you
that defensiveness as opposed to someone
who says you know I I can't think of any
I maybe maybe what you know so the
ability to introspect about the good and
the bad and integrate the good and the
bad is a is a healthy sign if you have a
friend who can't talk about the sadness
of their
childhood or a friend who can't talk
about the happiness who can't integrate
the good and the bad of their childhood
you know something happened there and if
you have a friend who won't talk at all
then you really know something happened
there you hit a sensitive spot are daddy
issues real because the term is thrown
around in culture like oh she has daddy
issues it's typically she has daddy
issues isn't it right so there's
something called edible development
which is sexual development it's really
relational development but it's sexual
development which is that all little
boys fall in love romantically with
their mothers and want to marry them so
all little boys say I want to marry you
Mommy Daddy get lost it's sort of like
that and all little girls want to be
Daddy's Little Princess and marry Daddy
and want Mommy to get lost and it's this
period of
about oh 3 to six 3 to six years old and
I always prepare parents for this
fathers need to reinforce themselves and
feel secure enough so when they're
little boys who have been their buddies
and who have loved them when their
little boys say bye-bye Daddy get lost
they don't react they don't go into a
deep depression they just they hold it
and they say oh I get it you love Mommy
that's okay same with little girls if
their mothers overreact become angry at
them reject them say oh you just love
your daddy and so but if daddies are not
present enough for little girls it does
inform so our first romantic
relationships are with our opposite sex
parent so as a little boy your first
romantic relationships with your mother
as a little girl your first romantic
relationships with your father if your
opposite sex parent is not present at
all there's a loss
there so you know sometimes what can
happen is if you don't have a present
father or if your father is really just
absent or if he's physically present but
emotionally absent you spend your life
looking for that kind of edible
connection that kind of admiration that
kind of love that kind of um you know
for someone to love you in the way that
a father loves a little girl but with
distrust built
in well not necessarily I mean sometimes
it's too much trust I mean if you are
hungry and somebody offers you scraps
you'll take the scraps right if you're
hungry and somebody says here's some
crumbs of a muffin so the problem is
that but what if they
offered me the scraps and sometimes the
scraps as I went to reach for them
walked out and didn't come back then I
might develop a relationship that it's
not safe to trust the scraps because so
that's a father who's negligent but it
still leaves that little it still can
leave that little girl with a strong
desire to be loved in that way so it's
like a missing there's a missing piece
right so you'd say the Romantic
relationship with the opposite sex
parent is a very important part of our
sexual development and our relational
development and so it becomes a missing
piece for that child who then grows into
that adult um if a father was
abusive to a little girl then you know
that little girl may do what we call a
neurotic repetition which is she seeks
out abusive men because that's the only
kind of love that she knew or understood
so you know you have to remember that
that
children perceive of the relationship
with your with their parent as loving no
matter what the parent does to them I
used to work when I was a young social
worker in foster care and the children
who were physically abused by their
parents and neglected terribly still
wanted to be with their mothers and
fathers they didn't want to be taken
away because that's that was their
mother and father and they perceived of
that as love so however we're raised we
perceive of that that is love the
problem is if it's not healthy love then
we can neurotically repeat or repeat
that in our adult lives men young boys
and men I was looking at some stats
earlier on that said there's been
increased sexual inactivity amongst
young men which is an interesting stat
it's risen to almost 31% of men between
the ages of 18 and 24 reporting no
sexual activity in the past year so
that's almost doubled in a in about the
space of 18 years here's a interesting
St
High suicide rates amongst men men
account for nearly 80% of all suicides
in the US the highest rate observed
among 45 to 6 four yearolds globally
suicide is the leading cause of death
amongst young men and a survey conducted
in the UK found that an increasing
amount of men feel hopeless and
worthless and that are struggling with
finding meaning and purpose in the
world the plight of young men you talk
in your books and in your work about
yeah how the role of a man has changed
and how that this might not be
necessarily productive for the health
and well-being of a man yeah we've taken
away their purpose when you take a human
being's purpose
away remember the purpose for men was to
protect their family was to it was to
hunt in the old days feed their families
but it was also to protect their
families it was to provide for their
families and what we've done in
reversing everything thing is although
we raised up women and there are
certainly positive things about raising
up women but when we raised up women we
denigrated men and I have two sons so
this is very personal for me um and I
also see a lot of young men in my
practice um young adult men and what
I'll say is that they feel discouraged
they feel
purposeless they feel
diminished um yeah and there has been
something vengeful I
think about so the feminist movement was
meant to give women choice and to
balance off what was imbalanced in
society but there's something vengeful
about it I think at moments I feel like
there's something vengeful about the
modern feminist movement which is let's
get them let's diminish them let's take
over let's push them out let's you know
let's beat them up let's get you know
let's show them who's I mean something
really vengeful so it in so for me the
feminist movement was meant to create
balance it wasn't meant to it it wasn't
meant to set into play this other kind
of imbalance and you know more than I
think 60% of universities are women now
as well as graduate schools and so that
means and the study show that men will
marry at their educational level or
below women will only marry at their
educational level or
above and by diminishing men so much in
terms of our education and professions
we basically taken men's purpose away
they feel purposeless and the other
thing is and I'm going to
say when men stay home to nurture their
children now remember as mammals we have
defined roles that is not instinctual
for men to stay home and nurture their
young it's just it's a reverse of
something and the issue there is that
there's an inverse relationship between
oxytocin and
testosterone the higher the
oxytocin guess what the L the
testosterone
yes so if we're staying at home bonding
there Reas for that so
mammals when they are nurturing their
young they don't want somebody mating
with them go away right so the idea is
that when a female nurtures she doesn't
want to have sex she doesn't want to
right so the investment in nurturing
pushes away the investment in mating and
this is why I've read so many stats
around men's testosterone dropping when
they become fathers um some yeah I I
couldn't believe that was true when I
read it it's true there was some studies
to talk about how women's testosterone
goes up women have testosterone when
they're out in the Work World fighting
like men that their testosterone goes up
and men's testosterone when they stay
home goes down now what that's doing for
sex lives um there's some research about
you know it that is the next wave which
is what does it do to sex lives because
men have to perform they have to get it
up to be crude tell me about it um and
so if your testosterone is low you're
not going to get it up
right which is why there's all this
Viagra and these patches and supplements
and you know because it's not it's not
instinctually normal for husbands to
stay home and nurture their children and
that's the Inconvenient Truth how that
affects men's and women's sex life when
women come home from their banking jobs
and their law jobs um did their
husbands not want to have sex with them
and you know is that breaking up so I
mean so this is all I think this is the
next wave of we've revers things
societally so
fast and then we hope that our
evolutionary bodily responses are just
going to catch up in in merely a a
century and it just doesn't Evolution
doesn't work like that it takes hundreds
if not thousands of years to change our
our bodily evolutionary responses right
our instinctual responses so this is you
know it's it's problematic um and also
when men's testosterone goes down they
get depressed so they don't perform
sexually well they get depressed they
feel
purposeless um they can't do what
they're instinctually supposed to do
which is provide protect hunt you know
we talk about Dei I mean why aren't we
talking about Dei when it when it when
it comes to men and women why aren't we
talking about balancing the scales
giving purpose again um and and honestly
we should be talking about what happens
to men when they actually do stay home
and nurture their young is this stats to
support the idea that if you're at home
raising your kids as a man you have you
struggle in the
bedroom so there was some research I
know that was going on about that how it
affects sex drive but when your
testosterone goes down it does affect
sex drive we're just not talking about
it so I have anecdotal patients I have a
patient who who
whose wife was a hardcore woman in
finance and you know he he couldn't he
lost interest in her he had to go out of
the marriage and have affairs with women
who were more feminine who were more so
he could feel as if he could play that
masculine role he couldn't do that in
his
marriage and so are we going to
see kind of a shift in society as a
result result of this we're already
seeing it I mean the other thing that
we're doing is to young boys let's talk
about what we're doing to young boys
this starts very young we basically
educate young boys in a way that really
favors girls you know from a very young
age we talk about being able to sit
quietly and regulate your emotions and
not be aggressive and not be impulsive
and these little boys are being
diagnosed with ADHD many of them just
for being little boys little boys need
to run around they have a lot of
physical energy they have tons of
testosterone when you're like between
three and six you have a surge of
testosterone and all you want to do is
run and jump and play and be outside and
what we're doing we're putting them in
school making them sit in circle time so
so we marginalize them we label them we
say they have a problem we say that they
have ADHD and they have behavioral
problems and in many of them the stress
that I talked about is the stress of
making little boys be more like little
girls and that's where it starts and so
then they go into
childhood and again the educational
system favors the way girls learn not
the way boys learn how to boys learn
boys have attention spans for very short
periods of time and then they need lots
of physical activity so ideally if you
go to and look at the boy schools what
do they do they run the boys like
running the dogs in the park
they sit for 45 minutes or half an hour
but then the boys get time off to run
around and then they'll sit another half
an hour and then they'll run around I
mean they have like four ree peries a
day and so that's really better for boys
and little girls have more of a capacity
to sit quietly in circle time and and
sort of you know they're they don't have
as much testosterone they don't have
that need to run and jump and play to
the same degree that little boys do they
do need to play we're not letting our
kids play boys and girls because we're
trying to force left brain development
on them too early but we are forcing
little boys into this box and they're
not doing well in that box and then
they're labeled they're labeled as
having behavioral problems ADHD and that
label them follows them through
childhood sometimes into Middle School
into into high school yeah what would
you change I make you prime minister of
the world president of the world and you
can fix this issue oh I would have
little boys educated separately than
little girls in the early years in the
early years I would have boy schools and
girl schools because little little girls
learn differently and also there's been
a lot of evidence to show that in the
early years when you do single gender
education little girls will try things
will take risks with things that they
wouldn't in front of little boys and
little boys will try things that they
wouldn't take risks in front of little
girls like little boys are more like to
try art and painting and music little
girls are more likely to try stem and
math and you know all these things that
we talk about little girls should do so
the the idea is that um single gender
education in the early years is is
better for little kids because they
learn differently what about as it
relates to men what would you change to
fix the issues you were talking about
with testosterone and those kinds of
issues talk about it we should be
talking about it we don't talk about
this issue how much how many times have
you heard what I just said people don't
talk about the fact that when you raise
when if we're going to flip this around
and have men be the nurturers they're
going to have pretty low
testosterone you're going to have to
supplement their
testosterone and so you know and also
you take their purpose away
evolutionarily and they get depressed
women have many sources of self-esteem
they have work they have children
they're
relational and for the most part
historically men found their self-esteem
from meaningful and purposeful work and
also from protecting their families so
what we've done is we've taken their
purposeful work outside the home away
we've made their purposeful work staying
home with children and you know we've
lowered the testosterone so if you look
at it and say we're trying to switch
it's like a social experiment we're
trying trying to change something that's
taken thousands of years of evolution to
create in just you know less than 100
years and it's you know it's
problematic so what would I do I would
talk about it I would have couples talk
about it I think they need to talk about
the competitiveness I think they need to
talk about the the envy and the jealousy
and and even the the disappointment I
mean a woman who comes home and sees her
husband caring for the children on the
one hand she might say oh my husband's
so sweet and lovely and I love that he
cares for my children and on the other
hand she says to her friends I wish he
was bringing in more money and I wish he
was taking care you know I wish he was
taking care of me so it's problematic
there was a longitudinal study done in
the Philippines that followed 624 men
over almost 5 years and found that those
who became fathers experienced a
significant decline in testosterone
levels specifically newly partnered
fathers had a medium decrease of almost
30% in morning testosterone and 35% in
evening testosterone which were
significantly greater than the declines
observed in single nonfathers moreover
fathers who reported spending three or
more hours daily in child care had lower
testosterone levels compared to those
less involved in caregiving and there's
also an impact on co-sleeping where
Research indicates that fathers who
co-sleep with their children exhibit
lower testosterone levels than those who
do not this suggests that close
proximity during sleep May further
influence hormonal changes of associated
with parental caregiving one of the
arguments I've heard before as to why
men's testosterone dips if they're new
fathers is because it's an evolutionary
reason to make us not go out and cheat
on our partner and take care of our kids
well it's investment in it so either
you're invested in mating or you're
invested in caring for your children yes
and no because you still need to have
testosterone to have a relationship with
your wife a satisfying relationship so
and un unfortunately that doesn't stop
men from going out and cheating on their
wives because a healthy man would say
you know well we used to have sex twice
a day every day and now that we have a
baby we only have sex once or twice a
week because the baby's so small and and
a healthy man would say that's enough I
can compartmentalize I can right a less
healthy man might say I'm going to go
out and get it someplace else because I
can't get it here so yeah I mean there's
Nuance to all the question you're asking
but what I would say is that
testosterone going down a little bit
when you have a baby in the bed is fine
but the kind of testosterone we're
talking about going down when you stay
home and
nurture
um we'll see it could be problematic my
last question is about devices and
Technology yeah there's been a lot of
books written recently and a lot of
conversation around the impact that
screen social media mobile phones have
on children what is your thoughts and
philosophy towards raising healthy kids
in a world of techn
ology well I think it's the American
Pediatric Association says no technology
under the age of two for good
reason no iPhones no iPads right um you
want to sit and watch a Mr Rogers when
your baby is two together a rerun of Mr
Rogers Neighborhood that's fine but no
technology after that you want to really
regulate that technology now why is that
important because Tech
techology raises dopamine levels in your
brain which is why adults get addicted
to it too it's very addictive um and the
problem is that with
adults when you when you look at
technology it does raise your dopamine
but um there there was some research to
show that technology raises the dopamine
in an adolescence brain tenfold to that
of of so in other words it would be like
if you smoked a joint
it would you know make you high if an
adolescent smoke the same joint it would
make them 10 times higher it has to do
with the um the the sensitivity of the
brain to dopamine and the lack of
Regulation so um the prefrontal cortex
is the part of the brain that regulates
emotions and it's not fully developed
till about 25 so all that dopamine that
has to be regulated is more easily
regulated in an adult than an adolescent
so it's not not good because it leads to
addiction okay it's not good because uh
particularly social media but all kinds
of Technology they they get the amydala
going remember that that little almond
shaped stress regulating part of the
brain it turns on the stress
reaction um which you don't want to do
chronically there's lots of problems
with that um and in the case of social
media with adolescence particularly
adolescent girls it takes advantage I
mean you have to say that this was
invented to take advantage it's not a
coincidence uh it's manipulatively
created um because the reason that it's
so bad for teenage girls brains is
because the
self-consciousness the
perfectionism is all the brain in a
hyper Alert state of stress and fear
you're putting those girls and boys into
a hyper an state of fear and stress
right I have to be perfect I don't look
as good as them uh my my dress isn't as
pretty so so you're putting children
into a fear State and then they they
can't separate from the device it's like
they get there was a movie I think it
was called Inception where you could get
stuck in a paradigm you could get stuck
in this fantasy right in in a virtual
reality in a way they get get trapped in
this uh Paradigm of
perfectionism social isolation
self-consciousness which is all the
brain in a hypervigilant state of stress
anx so not good at all not good for
adults much worse for adolescent brains
what is the most important thing we
should have talked about today that we
didn't talk about so
far H I think we talked about a lot but
um I think you know
what I would say is that
um presence is just so critical to
children and there's no replacement this
idea that we have as a
society that caregiving of children is
something that can be generically
assigned to others that you can delegate
delegate other things to others delegate
your accounting delegate your laundry
delegate your cooking if you're a CEO
delegate everything you can but spend
time with your
children your relationship with them
their mental health depends upon it and
that's not something we say we say work
work work work make more money everybody
work work work work and and your
children will be just fine well clearly
our children are not just fine what do I
do as an employer I employ lots of
people and I'm thinking do I need
to give people three years off when they
have a kid is that the
well in my opinion give them as much
time off as you possibly can men and
women men and women whoever is the
primary attachment figure I would say
whoever is going to really be
responsible for caring for that child um
but then give them options give them
choices of how to work in the years that
their children are very young give them
options to work part-time or to share a
job or to work from home half of the
week so they don't have to leave their
child and still they can work um give
them choices and options that allow them
for some flexibility and control um if
you know that a an employee has young
children accept the fact that you know
they may need to leave early and not
stay as late as as other people who
don't have children and that's going to
make the people who don't have children
angry and you know what tough because
that's what those children need life
isn't fair it's not always fair and if
you want to have a child you too could
have
that but the idea of exact parody tough
because that's what Society needs it
needs healthy children if you're going
to have a child and you need to leave
every day at 4 so you're home for your
children so flexibility control options
as much time off in the beginning as
possible you realize that some of the
things you say are controversal
or not almost all of them yeah why' you
say them anyway because somebody has
to because they're the inconvenient
truths that are stopping us from having
healthy children who grow into unhealthy
adults and so somebody has to say these
things and if you're too worried about
people liking you then you don't
sometimes say what needs to be
said and fortunately I don't care if
people like me but I do care that people
like their children and want to be with
their
children so that's why I say these
things why is it so personal to you I
can see it in your
face well then you'd have to ask me
about my own personal story my personal
story just to wrap it up quickly is that
my own mother was a very loving mother
but could dissociate and by dissociate
she had a lot of trauma as a child and I
think she managed it by emotionally she
was like a little girl she's very sweet
but she was like a little girl and so I
couldn't always feel her I couldn't she
was like sand that slipped through my
finger so I can remember the pain but
she was she was there physically but I
could remember the pain of the absence
of her
mind and uh she could feel for me which
is why I have such
compassion but she couldn't think about
me so there's two things parents have to
be able to do for children children they
have to be able to feel for them they
have to feel empathy for their pain for
their distress they cannot look away
from their children's pain and distress
you cannot look away you do not have the
luxury of looking away from your
children's distress but you also have to
be able to think about them and be able
to think about who they are my mother
could feel for me but she couldn't think
about me cuz she would dissociate so my
own personal pain is having had a loving
mother who had some
limitations and so it made me want to be
a better mother but it also made me want
to treat people who want to be better
mothers and fathers what were the
symptoms that that had on you as a young
woman growing up as an adolescent I
struggled socially and I struggled uh
with my identity and personally and you
know self-esteem I would say and uh it
wasn't until I went into therapy um oh I
tried a lot of things in my 20s I worked
in television production I worked in uh
uh I worked on Capital Hill I worked I
worked in many different public
relations and in the end I found myself
sitting in my therapist office one day
and looking around and saying this is
where I want to be I want to be I want
to do what she does and I want to help
people the way she's helped me so that
relationship ship with my first
therapist and then my second therapist
and you know as psychoanalysts we have
to be in treatment for many many many
years because the point is we have to
work on ourselves so deeply that we
don't do harm to patients inadvertently
with our own issues so we have to be
very as we say very organized as a
person um but yeah so that's my personal
story and why mothering is so important
to me and the vulner ility of babies is
so important to
me Erica we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they are leaving it for and
the question that has been left for you
okay is what does your obituary
say oh my gosh I'm going to know who
left that you're going to tell me
after oh boy what does my obituary say
um
kind
generous um
compassionate fervent in her beliefs
stubborn as
hell a good friend a good
mother a wonderful
wife
yeah I think it will
I certainly think it
will and I think there' also be an
additional couple of sentences there
that speak to the value that you've
given to the world through the work that
you do now people might not agree with
everything you say because people have
lots of different opinions on these
subjects but I'm of the opinion that
people who are willing to deliver their
thoughts their truth based on the
science that they've experienced and
that they've read and what they've
studied and the experiences that they've
had the clients that they've seen it's
so unbelievably important because I
think if we look back through history
progress has occurred when people have
dissented from the accepted narrative in
fact I probably wouldn't be able to sit
here in America as a black man if it
wasn't for people who had the courage of
their convictions to descent from
certain narratives and so I've always I
think have had it hard worded to me that
disagreement is productive especially
when it's well-meaning and that's
exactly how I see your work I think that
you're challenging a narrative
um bringing evidence and a new opinion
to the table a different perspective
that I think is very very important for
so many and it's been so interesting for
me because I've struggled you know I'm
approaching That season of life where I
become a father and I'm reading all this
stuff about leave your kid to cry on the
floor in the supermarket or um put them
in timeout or um oh I am so giving you
my number yeah I know but I so I've been
trying to Wade through this storm of
like parenting advice and and
stuff and it's it's really wonderful to
hear hear your perspective because it is
a counter perspective it's the
perspective that nobody really wants to
say out loud um and therefore for me
it's useful thank you Erica thank you so
much for your time and generosity today
I really really appreciate it and please
um continue to do the work you do and
I'm very excited for your upcoming book
I think it's next year isn't it it is
about divorces um if anyone wants to
find more of your work we've got these
two exceptional books here being there
why prioritizing motherhood is the F in
the first three years matters which is a
wonderful book that was published in
2017 I believe and then this one here
Chicken Little the sky isn't falling
raising resilient Adolescence in the New
Age of Anxiety which was published in 21
I believe um I'll link both of these
below I highly recommend you read these
books if you're interested in these
subjects like I am um but where else can
people find you
www.car k m
i.com and also at attachment circles the
website should be up and running soon uh
if you're looking for community and
education um
come to attachment circles great I'll
link both of those below wherever you're
listening to this now Erica thank you
thank you for having me some of the most
successful fascinating and insightful
people in the world have sat across from
me at this table and at the end of every
conversation I asked them to leave a
question behind in the famous Diary of a
CEO and it's a question designed to
spark the kind of conversations that
matter most the kind of conversations
that can change your life we then take
those questions and we put them on these
cards on every single card you can see
the person who left the question the
question they asked and on the other
side if you scan that barcode you can
see who answered it next something I
know a lot of you have wanted to know
and the only way to find out is by
getting yourself some conversation cards
which you can play at home with friends
and family at work with colleagues and
also with total strangers on holiday
I'll put a link to the conversation
cards in the description below and you
can get yours at the diary.com this has
always blown my mind a little bit 53% of
you that listen to this show regularly
haven't yet subscribed to the show so
could I ask you for a favor if you like
the show and you like what we do here
and you want to support us the free
simple way that you can do just that is
by hitting the Subscribe button and my
commitment to you is if you do that then
I'll do everything in my power me and my
team to make sure that this show is
better for you every single week we'll
listen to your feedback we'll find the
guest that you want me to speak to and
we'll continue to do what we do thank
you so much
[Music]
oh